MIGHTY DESTROYER DISPLAYED, &c.

OBSERVING some years ago the dreadful havock made by the excessive use of distilled spirituous liquors in this part of the world, I was induced to insert  in  one of the almanacks an  extract of what had been written on that subject by Dr. Kales, fellow of the Royal Society, containing his own remarks, with the sentiments of several persons of note in the physical way; whole knowledge of the nature of distilled liquors, as well as of their effects on the human frame, best qualified  them to give a right judgment
thereon.  And as the excessive and indeed mistaken use of these liquors  continues, and rather increases, on this Continent, it is thought a republication  of those sentiments, with some additions, may, thro' divine blessing,  be beneficial to many; particularly to some well-minded people,
who are under mistaken prejudices on this most interesting subject. 
  It is pretended, that drams comfort, warm, and defend from the severity of
weather, to which men are sometimes exposed; without which, they say, they
should present with cold; which is probably, in a great measure, true of those who are habituated to drink them; the blood of such being thereby so much in overuse that it is well known many of the drinkers of drams are cold and useless in the midst of summer, without frequent repetitions: this is what some of them have owned. But on the other hand, how much more able are sober persons to endure cold and hardships? Their vital heat not  being extinguished  by intemperance, does, by its kindly genial warmth, more effectually secure them from the inclemency of the weather, than the false flesh of a dram. Besides, it is well known, that men did not perish in the coldest countries for want of drams formerly, when they were not to be had.
Of the undoubted truth of this, Captain Luis Agives a full proof in the account of his voyage to Hudson's Bay, page 199, where he observes,  And as to the pernicious effects of spirituous liquors in very hot climates,(as the coast of Guinea) it is observed, daily, the French and Portuguese, who do not indulge  in  distilled spirits, are healthy compared with the English; who, drinking freely of spirits, &c. die fast. Thus,
also, it is observed of the  women in the West-Indies, that being sober, they live long; but it is often otherwise with the men, who are more generally intemperate.
  The unhappy dram-drinkers are so absolutely bound in slavery to these infernal spirits, that they seem to have lost the power of delivering themselves from this worst of bondage. How much then is it the bounden duty  of those, who have it in their power, to with-hold this destructive man-bane,  either as parents, matters, or rulers to the people committed to their trust.
   Since then the evil is become so notoriously epidemical as to debilitate and destroy multitudes, in most parts of the world; it behoves all, who have any bowels of pity for their fellow-creatures, more especially the governors of the nations, as guardians and tender fathers, to guard the people committed to this charge from this mighty destroyer. Can there be any
consideration, of sufficient weight, to the contrary. Is it sound policy to encourage in the people, because a present revue arises from their debaucheries?
   Where will the revenue be when the people, who should pay thefts, are destroyed?  Are not a hardy, industrious healthy people, always found to be the most able to contribute amply to the support of government? And will not temperance, in the end, be found a more effectual means to increase the real wealth and strength of a nation, than to make drunkenness the cheapest of the vices? But is the consideration of the inhumanity of being instrumental to the destruction of multitudes, and in a manner, in some parts of the world, of whole nations, is not of weight enough to influence; yet, sure, the awful consideration, that it must needs be highly displeasing to our merciful Creator, to have his favourite creature man thus debased, disgraced, and destroyed both in body and soul, ought to have its due weight. Can it in reason be expected, that he will always remain an unconcerned spectator of such astonishing proceedings?  And will he not in mercy visit the nations for these things, to prevent the still much greater ruin of future generations, in conformity to his usual method of proceeding, when irregularities are arrived to great excesses? This disease has now attained to so enormous
a pitch, that it is much to be feared nothing less than God's severe fatherly correction, will effectually cure it in many of the nations; who see as  supine and unconcerned about it, as is only so many thousands of locusts were destroyed thereby: for is in fifty or sixty  years this destructive pest has spread thus far and wide, low vastly greater will the havock amongst mankind be in an  hundred  years more, is some check be not put to its career?
  If it had been said, an hundred years ago, to any of the rulers of the nations, that they should patiently, and even unconcernedly, see such multitudes of their subjects destroyed - both body and soul, and that only for filthy lucre.
The plain truth is, that it is with the nations as it frequently happens to private persons, that when they grow gradually from bad to worse, they, at the same time, become more and more hardened, so as to be even reconciled to practices for which they had at first, the utmost detestation and abhorrence; for familiarity takes away our attention, and robs things of their power to strike strongly upon us.
   Though thousands and tens of thousands; perish every year by distilled spirituous liquors, yet how appear to lay it effectually to heart. I must here except the heads of the poor wild Indians, of the Six Nations situate back of New-York, and other parts of North-America, who being sensible of the great destruction made amongst them by distilled spirituous liquors, have long since, and do still continue, earnestly to desire, that no such spirit
should be sold to their people.  At a treaty held at Carlisle in this province, with the deputies of the Six Nations, the Delaware and other western Indians, in the year 1753, Scarrooyady, one of the chiefs of the Six Nations, speaking on behalf of all the Indians present, expressed himself to the following effect, viz.   The Indian speaker gave, as is usual with them in matters of moment, a treble firing of wampum, in confirmation of this request.  The destructive effect of distilled spirits, have also extended their baneful influence amongst the people of Africa.
   It is, in a great measure, through the introduction of those infernal spirits, that the poor negroes have been as it were bewitched, and prevailed upon to captivate their unhappy country people, in order to bring them to the European market: hence devastation, bloodshed and misery have spread in their land; many thousands, and hundreds of thousands, have been doomed to a miserable thraldoms and many, very many, brought to a cruel and untimely end:  innumerable instances might be mentioned, to confirm this melancholy truth;  of which I shall mention two, viz. Andrew Brue, the noted French factor, who resided sixteen years in Guinea, tells us,   It is no uncommon thing for habitual rum-drinkers, when a fit of sickness comes on, which they conclude will be their last, to desire to have plenty of rum by them by which means, they continue intoxicated till death: to so astonishing and deplorable a sottish condition have they reduced themselves!  This is a case so calamitous to mankind, that to have a thorough sense of it, and yet not to demonstrate, nor earnestly caution against it, is certainly  as criminal as it is unfriendly not to warn a blind person of a dangerous precipice or pit yet, alas! how unconcerned are the greatest part of mankind  at this most enormous ruin of multitudes! In trials for life, what diligence
is used to find the occasion of the loss of one subject!  What care will not a faithful physician for the preservation of one life! How did the wise Romans honour him, who saved the life of one Roman citizen! But in the present case, it is not one, nor one hundred, nor one thousand, but probably no less than a million, that perish, yearly, by this word of plagues. How then dire the governors of nations be unconcerned or silent in a cause in which humanity, virtue, and the real welfare of mankind, both civil and religious, are so deeply concerned? A cause, which tends not only to the
weakening the faculties, enervating the bodies of men, but also in debasing the species, and shortening the lives of multitudes.                      
   But the most afflictive and dreadful effect of the common use of distilled spirituous liquors, are, that it not only heightens the passions of men and depraves their morals; but what is infinitely worse, and ought to be an awakening consideration, they become prophage and abandoned, and to the last degree regardless of their duty to God and man; the feelings of the mind are gradually benumb'd, and art insensibility to the healing influence of religion ensues.
  The Almighty who has so curiously wrought our wonderful frame out of the dust, knowing how prone, we are to disorder it by irregularities, hath of his tender fatherly care of us, not only implanted in us a strong desire of life and self-preservation, but has also strictly warned us to avoid all destructive irregularities and vices, and to practice those virtues which
are so well adapted to our nature, that they have a direct tendency to give
health to the soul, as well as marrow to the bones, Prov. cxi. 7. Yet how is this delicate, this curiously wrought framey abused and disordered by repeated irregularities of many kinds but never before to the enormous degree that it has of late years arrived at by the excessive abuse of these fermented, distilled spirituous liquors, which by their mischievous effects, to claim Satan himself for their author. The benevolent author first mentioned from whose collection great part of the foregoing is collected, observes, 
  Dr. Cheyne farther observes.   The mistaken use and grievous abuse of rum and other distilled spirits, perhaps in no case appear more palpably than at the time of harvest, a business which, under the Mosaic Dispensation, was particularly enjoined to be carried on with humiliation and thanksgiving, and ought by all means, to be observed as such under the gospel; but through the abuse of spirituous  liquors, is made an occasion of a greater abuse of the creature and dishonour of the Creator; this arises, in many, from a mistaken persuasion that hard  labour, particularly that of the harvest field, cannot  be carried on without a quantity of rum or other distilled spirits; and in support of this opinion, we are frequently told of the many people who have died in the field through extream heat and fatigue, and it is supposed that many more would die, is a plentiful use of spirituous liquors was not allowed. But this I am persuaded is a great mistake, it being much more likely that the free use of rum occasioned the death of those people; the quantity they had swallowed down,  sending a greater flow of spirits into the head than the strength of the body could support. Indeed the repeated large quantities of rum commonly drank during the whole time of harvest, keeps up the blood in a continual ferment and sever, in which state people cannot have a proper restorative sleep; their constitutions are thereby enervated, their lives shortened, and an
unfitness for religious impressions generally prevails.
   These most solemn and weighty considerations, have induced some well-minded people to endeavour to lead, by their examples, their friends and neighbours into a contrary practice; and under these attempts, experience has made it manifest, that very little or no strong liquor is necessary at those times; indeed they have been convinced that the harvest and other laborious work, can be very well managed without making use of any spirituous liquors at all. If such labour was carried on with steadiness and proper moderation,
there would certainly be no need of a recruit of strength being sought for by
 that means; more frequent intervals of rest, with a little food, oftener allowed the reapers, and small drinks; such as molasses and water made agreeable with a little cyder, small  beer, or even milk and water, would fully enable them to perform their work to their employer's satisfaction and  their own advantage; and the over plus wages they would receive, instead of
the spirituous liquors usually given, might be sufficient to purchase bread  for their families.
  This sober and moderate manner of proceeding was certainly the general practice in this province, for a considerable number of years after its first settlement, when but small quantities of strong liquors, and often none at all would be procured. The people in those early times maintained their
health, and were enabled to perform their labour to satisfaction. But this did not long continue, the great call for our provisions brought us into connections with those countries from whence rum was procured; and the desire of gain has since in a progressive encrease, induced our traders to bring us plenty of distilled spirits, and together with them diseases and death in
return for our flour, and other useful produce. So early as the year 1728, we
find the introduction and consumption of rum had made an amazing progress, and began to rouse the attention of some of the considerate, may I not say,  of the lovers of their country in that day. And from the too apparent general use, there is no room to suppasse but that it has gone on in an increased proportion to our numbers not now so easily ascertained, from the additional numbers of ports, and various means of procuring it: Nor ought
we to omit, in such accounts, the large quantities of whisky and other liquors distilled amongst ourselves from grain, fruit, and molasses, which cannot well be calculated.  
   I have heard of several thoughtful people who, from a persuasion that the common method of giving spirituous liquors to labourers was exceeding hurtful, have made it a condition with those they have employed, not to use any spirituous liquors in their fields; these have had their work performed to good satisfaction, and without any damage ensuing to 'their labourers.   Nay, where they have remained any considerable time: with such employers,
they have generally acknowledged themselves sensible of the benefit arising  from hating thus totally restrained the use of those liquors. A particular instance of this kind occurred last summer, in the case of Joshua Evans, of Haddonfield; this considerate person being convinced that the use of rum and other spirituous liquors, was extreamly hurtful to the labouring people; more especially during the time of harvest, apprehended it to be his duty, to become an example in opposition to this pernicious custom; and he concluded to run all risques of loss and damage, which might happen to himself by the delay of bringing in his harvest, rather  than comply with a custom which he
apprehended to be so destructive of his fellow men.
   He therefore offered six pence per day more than other farmers, to such labourers as were willing to assist in bringing in his harvest, on condition that no spirituous liquors should be used in his fields. Notwithstanding the Angularity of such a proposal a sufficient number of labourers offered themselves, to whom he remarked, That the hurrying manner in which the people drove on their labour in the harvest field, caused an unnatural ferment and heat in their bodies, and of course an excitive thirst ensued, which often occasioned their drinking water, or small liquors, in such immoderate degree
as to become hurtful and very dangerous, that this was generally assigned as a reason for the use of spirituous liquors:
  That, in order to avoid these extremes, he proposed to lead them himself in  the harvest work, desiring they would go no faster than he did; they acted accordingly, and his corn was cut down and brought in as well, if not better, than ever it had been before; and tho' the people drank little but water or milk and water, chusing it rather than cyder and water, or small beer, which they  were not used to; they went thro' their business with satisfaction to  him and themselves. This person has pursued the same course with labourers  he has hired for other work; who, tho' accustomed to spirituous liquors, after having served him several days, have frankly acknowledged they had done very well without them, finding themselves in a better state both of body and  mind than when they began to work for him.
   This is a plain instance in contradiction to the common prejudice, that laboring people cannot with safety perform their work without using those liquors. Several more examples might be instanced of some considerate people who have made it a rule not to make any use of spirituous liquors, either amongst their workmen in the prosecution of their trades, or on their
plantations. To these experience has shewn, that their people could not only do as well without it, but found themselves much better in health, and well satisfied in mind.
   Several physicians of eminence have declared themselves in favour of this sentiment; amongst others, the celebrated doctor Buchan, in his Domestic Medicine, or Family Physician, a work so well esteemed as to have been within these two years, twice reprinted in this city. At page 71, of the English edition, he says.   At page the same, the author tells us.It is a prevailing opinion in favour of drinking spirituous liquors at harvest, and other hard labour, that it gives relief by throwing out the sweat. Now, moderate quantities of any small liquor, even water itself, is not drank too cold,
and particularly is sweetened with molasses, and a little sour'd with some proper acid; would certainly answer the purpose, without the bad effects  which attend the use of spirits.
  It is well known that a pint of good molasses will, in distillation, afford rather more than a pint of good proof rum; therefore must contain as much, is not more real strength than the same quantity of rum, without any of its noxious qualities; being then in the state the Almighty first formed it, the fiery property so clothed and united with the earthy and balsamick parts, as to cause it to be quite friendly to our nature, and not liable to intoxicate;
as the spirit alone will, when separated by distillation from the oilier parts.
  Small beer or water mixed with some of our homemade wines; or, as before
said, water mixed with a due quantity of molasses, made agreeably acid, to such as chuse it, by mixing it with a due proportion of cyder, or some other acid liquor, or even good vinegar; milk and water, or even water itself, is used with caution, will answer all the purposes of common drink for labouring people.
  Amongst the several prejudices in favour of the mistaken use of spirituous liquors, there is none gives it a great sanction or support, than the prevailing opinion, even with persons of reputation, that what they term a moderate quantity of rum mixed with water, is the best and safest liquor that can be drank; hence confirming it, that spirit in one form or other is necessary. To such who have not been accustomed, and think they cannot habituate themselves to drink water, there may appear to be some kind of plea
in this argument, especially to travellers, who often meet with beer, cyder, or other fermented liquors that are dead, hard, sour, or not properly  fermented, which tend to generate air in the bowels, producing colicks, &c.  But I believe if those persons suffered the weight of the subject, and the  consequence of the encouragement they thereby give to die use of these
destructive spirits, to take proper place with them, it might suggest the propriety, is not necessity, of introducing a more salutary practice to  themselves and families. That pure fluid (water) which the benevolent father  of the family of mankind points out for general use, is so analogous to the human frame, that except in a very few cases, people might with safety  gradually use themselves to it: And as to such well disposed people who  still retain a favourable opinion for the use of spirit mixed with water,  ought they not, even from love to mankind, to endeavour to restrain from,  and example others against it,(on account of the prodigious havock made by the use of spirits) agreeable to the example set us by the Apostle Paul,  Cor. viii.13.  If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend; how much more then ought they to restrain from that which may tend to establish mankind in a practice generally destructive; more especially when they consider the danger themselves are in, of encreasing the quantity of spirit with their water; as it has been observed, that the use of this mixture is particularly apt, almost imperceptibly, to gain upon those who, use it; so that many otherwise good and judicious people, have, unwarily to themselves and others, fallen with the common herd, a sacrifice to this mighty devourer. And where water is met with, as is sometimes the case, which is scarce fit to drink; its vain to  think to remove the noxious qualities by mixing it with spirit; for tho' bad  water may be made more palatable by mixing spirit with it, yet all the bad  qualities of the water will remain, to which will only be superadded the bad qualities of the spirit. There are many ways proposed by which water may be helped without any such additions, as by filtration, thro' porous stones, or
thro' an earthen vessel, in the bottom of which there is a quantity of sand, which retains the noxious mixture. Hard water may be made lost by boiling, or by being exposed to the sun and air. Some propose mixing water, which is impure, with loam; this being well stirred and lest to settle, the noxious parts will subside with the loam, and the water may be drawn off clear and fit for use.
   Dr. Cheyne in his treatise before mentioned, observes, That without all peradventure, water is the primitive original beverage; as it is the only simple fluid fitted for diluting, moistening and cooling the ends of drink, appointed by nature, and happy had it been for the race of mankind, is other mixed and artificial liquors had never been invented. 
Speaking of the effects of wine (a liquor in general much less hurtful than
distilled spirits) which he says to have been so much in use at the time he wrote, that the better sort of people scarcely diluted their food with any other liquor, he remarks, "That as natural causes will always produce their proper effects, their blood was inflamed into gout, stone, and rheumatism, raging fevers, pleurisies, &c. Water is the only dissolvent or menstruum,  and the most certain diluter of all bodies proper for some.
   Doctor Short, in his discourse of the inward use of water, speaks much in its commendation, he says, we can draw a very convincing argument of the excellency of water, from the longevity and healthfulness of those who at first had no better liquor, and the health and strength of body and serenity of mind or those who at this day have no other common liquor to drink. Of this the common people amongst the Highlands of Scotland are a sufficient instance, amongst whom it is no rarity to find persons of eighty, ninety, yea
an hundred years of age, as healthy, strong, and nimble, as wine or ale bibbers are at thirty-six or forty. The  excellency of water, the doctor says, may be argued from the great success people, otherwise despicable,  have attained over other nations, while they remained content with the product of nature for drink.  Of this the Persian, Grecian, and Roman monarchies are instances. This was also the case of our ancestors, the  Saxons, Danes, and Normans, whilst their manners remained simple, and their food and drink such as nature had provided, they encreased to such a degree, that their country not being able to contain them, they were obliged to send out swarms of people to seek for settlements in the more southern parts of the world; these gradually settled themselves in the different parts of the Roman empire: But since those Northern Kingdoms have forsaken the wholesome customs of their forefathers, and habituated themselves to the use of strong liquors, they are so enfeebled, and their numbers have so much decreased, that many parts of their own country now remain uncultivated. The rulers easy under the pecuniary advantages which arise, themselves enslaved to the practice of drinking to excess, look without concern on this enormous ruin of  multitudes of their fellow men. Thus it is in Ilutlla, where a vast revenue
is railed from distilled spirituous liquors, and a multitude of people  proportionally large, are destroyed thereby. 
  
  Cheyne says he has known men of weak and tender constitutions, who could neither eat nor digest upon drinking wine, who, by drinking at meals common water heated, have recovered their appetites and digestion, &c. have thriven  and grown plump. Speaking of malt liquors, he gives it as his sentiment, that a weak stomach can as readily, and with less pain, digest pork and pease soup, as Yorkshire or Nottingham ale: he adds, That they are also
glutinous a nature as to make excellent bird lime, and when simmered sometime
over a gentle fire, make the most slicking, and the best plaster for old strains that can be contrived. Even the small beer that is commonly drank at  London, if it be not well boiled, very clear, and of a due age, must be hurtful to persons of weak nerves and slow digestion.
  Doctor  Buchan  tell us, The great quantity of viscid malt liquor drank by the common people of England, cannot fail to render the blood fizy and unfit for circulation, from whence proceed obstructions and inflammations of the lungs. Those who drink ardent spirits or strong wine, do not run less hazard;   these liquors heat and inflame the blood, and tear the tender vessels of the lungs in pieces.
  Doctor Short, page 33, after describing the many distempers produced by drinking of malt and other fermented liquors, adds, That seeing constitutions differ, it is not to be expected that spirituous liquors would produce all the same symptoms in one and the same person, yet that all drinkers have several of them; and if they come not to that height, its because they afterwards use great exercise or hard labour, with sometimes thin diluting liquors, which prevent their immediate hurting.
   Its customary, and often necessary in the summer season, particularly in  afternoons, for people who are spent by labour or application, to have recourse to some kind of refreshment. This is generally of two kinds, very different in their nature and effect, viz. The one is a mixture of spirituous liquors, as punch, grog, &c. or fermented liquors, as cyder, beer, &c. The
other is mild and diluting, such as tea, or coffee, &x. The use of spirituous or fermented liquors, for the reasons already given, are hurtful and dangerous; more especially, as the sorrowful experience of many within knowledge, has taught that there is very great danger of even sober people who use them, with what is termed moderation, becoming habituated and
gradually encreasing their strength and quantity, till it proves the ruin of themselves and families.
  This caution can scarcely be too often repeated, as it has been so frequently the melancholy situation of persons, otherwise valuable members of society. But the use of mild diluting drinks, such as coffee, or the several sorts of teas, either of our own produce or those brought from the Indies, may be truly termed innocent and friendly to our natures, and very proper to promote a good personation and recruit our spirits when disilpated  thro'
application or labour. And as the life of these innocent dilutors have not  escaped centre, more especially from persons who are attached, to the use of  spirituous or fermented liquors; it may be agreeable to the reader, to hear  the sentiments of doctor Cheyne on the subject. And here it may be well to remark that these observations were addressed to the people of England, where the heat not being so great as in these parts, those reiterative dihitent drinks are not so frequently necessary. A dish, or two of coffee, the
doctor says, with a little milk to soften it, in raw or damp weather, or on a watering and slegmatick stomach, is not only innocent but a present relief.
  Again we know, Lys he, that warm water will most of any thing, promote and
assist digestion in persons of weak stomachs and tender nerves; by this alone I have seen several such persons recover to a miracle, when cold mineral waters, bitters, cordials, and drams have done rather harm than good. Tea is but an infusion in water of an innocent plant: Innocent, he says, because  we find by its taste, it has neither poisonous, deleterious, nor acrimonious qualities; and we are certain from its use, in the countries it come from
(which are larger than Europe) that they receive no damage from it; but on  the contrary, that it promotes both digestion and perspiration. The arguments for its relaxing the coats of the stomach and bowels by its heat, arc of no force; for unless it be drank much hotter than the blood, it can do no hurt that way.----However, I would advise those who drink tea plentifully, not to  drink it much hotter than blood warm, whereby they will receive all
its benefits, and be secure against all the harm it can possibly do.
  Doctor Engelbertus Kempser, physician of the Dutch embassy to the emperor of Japan, in his account of that  country, giving a particular account of the growth, preparation, and use of tea; says, It is so common in Japan, that travellers drink scarce any thing else upon the road. The fresh gathered leaves are dried or roasted over the fire in an iron pan, and when hot, rolled with the palm of the hand on a matt, till they become curled. They
Have public roasting houses built for this very purpose, and contrived so  that every body may bring their leaves to be roasted. The doctor makes no distinction between green and bohea; the only difference from his account, arises from the different time of gathering. The first, gathered whilst the leaves are tender, has the best flavor and is most valuable; the second is  less so: the last, gathered when the leaves are full grown is the cheapest.  He gives it as his sentiments, from his observations of the effect of tea, that when properly prepared and of a due age, it gently refreshes the animal  spirits, and wonderfully chears and comforts the mind; it opens obstructions, cleanses the blood, and more particularly removes that tartarous matter which is the efficient cause of gravelly and gouty distempers.  This he says it does so effectually, that he never met with any who was troubled either  with the gout or stone, amongst the tea-drinkers of Japan. He adds that he is wholly of opinion that the use of teas would be attended with the same success in the like cases, even in Europe, were it not for an hereditary disposition, for either of these distempers derived to some persons from their ancestors; and which is frequently cherished and fomented by a too plentiful use of wine, beer, strong liquors and flesh meats. It appears the use of tea meets with opposition in the East countries, as well as amongst ourselves, from those persons whose practice contradicts the use of these kinds of innocent diluting drinks: for the doctor remarks, That in Japan the
use of tea is very much cried down by those persons who are lovers of sakki beer, which is there brewed from rice.
   All the good qualities ascribed by the above mentioned physicians, to foreign tea, may be as truly applied to teas made of our own country produce, such as sage, balm,, burnet, sassafrass, &c. &c. these I am  persuaded would answer all, is not more and better purposes than the foreign teas. But I spare to say much on this head at present, lest by discouraging the use of any mild diluting drink, (especially one in such general use, and which  simply considered as a diluent, must be acknowledged a good substitute,) any  strength should be given to the use of spirituous or fermented liquors in its stead.
   We may also make a very good refreshing drink of the nature of coffee; from roasted wheat, barley, rye, or chetnuts, full as agreeable, wholesome, and nourishing, is not much more so than coffee itself.                              
  Upon the whole it may be asked, What can be done towards preventing or putting a check to the prodigious havock made by the present use of spirituous liquors? To this I shall reply with the respectable author first mentioned.  Let such lawmakers, governors, and rulers, who retain any love and pity for their fellow men; let these be earnestly requested seriously, and solemnly to consider, whether it is not their indispensable duty to use their utmost endeavours, that a stop may be put to this dreadful calamity; let not the apprehension of loss or any present inconveniency, deter any from doing their duty in this respect, because there cannot any inconveniencies possibly arise from the redress of this grievance, which deserves to be named with those evils which will be the undoubted consequence of its continuance.   The reasons that have hitherto prevailed to the countenancing of this most
destructive practice, ought surely to be rejected with scorn and indignation, when the welfare of such vast numbers are so deeply concerned. What multitudes of lives would thereby be saved, and what innumerable outrages, as theft, murder, &c. prevented: To rectify which, were an apparently vain and fruitless attempt, while drunkenness is made the cheapest of all vices.  A vice which can no otherwise be effectually prevented from raging with its
present excessive enormity, and spreading devastation all around,  but by laying such high taxes upon distilled spirituous liquors, as well those made amongst us, as those imported from abroad, as will make the drinking it sufficiently expensive to put it out of the reach of so great a number of
insatiable drinkers, to use it; at least in its present degree of strength.--=How severe a judgment is it, when God leaves men to be their own scourgers?  with how unrelenting and unmerciful a heart do they execute the most
severe punishment upon themselves!----Particulars who view this matter in its
full importance, will query,  What can an individual or private man do in the case? To these it may be observed, That as popular amendments consist wholly  of the actions of individuals, every one who is sincere in his desires, that a remedy may be applied to this mighty evil, must, to the utmost of his power, discourage the encrease of spirituous liquors either by importation, distillation, or otherwise, and not deceive themselves, or rather suffer the
God of this world to deceive them by means of the specious pretences commonly advanced; such as, That other people will be active in augmenting the quantity if they do not; or, That however people may abuse themselves thro' excess, yet what is deemed a moderate quantity, may lawfully be used; but it may easily be shewn, that these and other arguments commonly advanced, are  vain, tho' plausible pretences; that the true motive is the desire of gain:  That every new importer and 'distiller, (and oh that the vender also may bring his situation to the true balance-becomes a party to the evil; gives
fresh strength to the practice, by holding out an additional quantity, and of course making it in some degree cheaper, at least easier for their fellow  men to come at, to the destruction of their brethren, children of the same father, and who as Christians they profess to love as themselves.
   And as for such who, tho' convinced of the impropriety of the practice,  yet for fear of not having their labour performed, or for other reasons, cannot prevail upon themselves to refrain giving it to their servants and labourers, let these at least so weaken and qualify it, as to prevent its
immediate destructive effects.
  Every eminent physician has given the following direction for the benefit of those who have not wisdom enough lest at once to abandon the odious and  pernicious practice of drinking distilled spirituous liquors, viz. By degrees to mix water with the spirit; to lessen the quantity every day, and keep to the same quantity of water, till in about the course of a week, nothing of the dram kind be used along with the water. By this means the person will suffer no inconveniency, but reap great benefit upon leaving off drams or spirits, as has been tried by many. Is any gnawing be lest in the stomach upon quite leaving it off, a little warm broth, weak tea, or any thing of that kind, will be of service. The appetite always increases in a few days
after leaving off drams, unless by the too long continuance of them, the tone of the stomach is destroyed. And when the stomach is thus affected, a cup of carduus, camomile tea, wormwood or centaury every morning fading and every evening, will be sound a good remedy. Some GENERAL MAXIMS, mostly drawn  from the foregoing, which as they cannot be too obviously held up in the view of the young and inconsiderate, its hoped the observant reader will excuse
the repetition.
   THE great rule of diet is to study simplicity: Nature delights in the most plain and simple food; and every animal, except man, follows her dictates.
    Nothing conduces more to health and long life, than abstinence and plain food, with due labour.
    Water alone is sufficient and effectual for all the purposes of human want in drink: It is the universal dissolvent nature has provided, and the most certain diluter of all bodies proper for food ; quickens the appetite and strengthens digestion most.  Doctor Cheyne and doctor Cadogan.
    Strong and spirituous liquors were never designed for common use: They were formerly kept in England, as other medicines are, in apothecaries shops:
If freely indulged, they become a certain tho' slow poison.  Cheyne.
    All intoxicating liquors may be considered as poisons; however disguised, that is their real character, and sooner or later they will have their  effect. Doctor Buchan.
    Every act of intoxication puts nature to the expence of a fever, in order to discharge the poisonous draught; when this is repeated almost every day, it is easy to foresee the consequence.
    Fevers occasioned  by drinking, do not always go off in a day, they frequently end in an inflammation of the breast, liver, or brain, and produce fatal effects.
    There is no danger in leaving off drinking strong liquors at once, the plea for continuing them being false and groundless. 
    Strong liquors do not prevent the mischiefs of a surfeit, nor carry it off so safely as water, tho' they seem to give present relief.  
  Many imagine that hard labour could not be supported without drinking strong liquors.  This tho' a common, is a very erroneous opinion: Men who never tasted strong liquors, are not only able to endure more fatigue, but also live much longer than those who use them daily.
  Every thing that has past the fire, so that it has had due time to divide and penetrate its parts, as in distillation, as far as it possibly can, retains a caustic corrosive and burning quality ever afterwards.
  In the continued distillation of spirits, the action of fire is so strong as to reduce them to liquid fire at last; which will of themselves evaporate in visible flames and fumes. 
  The great quantity of viscid malt liquor drank by the common people of England, cannot fail to render the blood fizy and unfit for circulation, from
whence proceed obstructions  and inflammations of the lungs, &c. Buchan.
   Malt liquors (excepting clear small beer or due age) are extreamly hurtful to tender and studious persons. 
   There are few great ale drinkers who are not physical, nor is that to be wondered at, considering the glutinous and almost indigestible nature of strong ale. 
   Those who drink ardent spirits or strong wines do not run less hazard; these liquors heat and inflame the blood, and tear the tender vessels of the lungs in pieces. 
   Doctor Cadogan in his late treatise on the gout, says, He cannot allow him  to be strictly temperate, who drinks any wine or strong liquors at all, unless it be medicinally.
THE END. 

