SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE SITUATION, DISPOSITION, AND CHARACTER
OF THE INDIAN NATIVES OF THIS CONTINENT.

PREFACE.
   The writer of the following sheets has thrown together a few facts,
to obviate some mistakes which have been embraced, respecting the Natives of
this land; he neither wishes to natter those of his own colour by acknowledging that they are superior to the tawney Indian; otherwise than as they excel him in acts of beneficence and of an imitation of the the great Author of the Christian Religion; whose name they have assumed; nor to exalt the character of the poor untutored Indian, at the expense of truth, by
over-rating their chastity, their love of justice, and hospitality;  particularly in their affectionate reception of our Ancestors on their first settlement of Pennsylvania; nor to say more in their favour than is supported by the concurrent testimonies of historians of various religious professions and different nations.
  Neither is it intended to justify these people in any of their acts of cruelty: The motives which have induced the writer to engage in this publication are superior to party views; an apprehension of duty, and universal good-will to mankind. And if the Indian is represented to have
been oppressed and injured, it is not to provoke a spirit of retaliation,  nor to excite a discontent,  but to state to the view of the public, wherein they have been aggrieved; and wherein they have been culpable, that the people of these states may see they have not been free from blame, in hopes that a more candid and indulgent consideration of their situation may excite in us humanity and tenderness.
  Be not offended therefore if the Indian is represented as a rational being as well as ourselves, is having an immortal soul, capable of receiving the  refining influence of our holy religion, it is that he may be allowed to dwell in safety, and rejoice in the  opportunity, which a return of peace,  may afford to instruct him in the knowledge of the true God.
  If doubts should remain, whether the Indians are, indeed susceptible of those religious impressions as here mentioned; the reader is referred to the several accounts of the successful labours of the pious Thomas Mayew, John Elliott, and others in New-England, published by themselves; and also a publication of a more late date, by David Brainard, of New-Jersey who resided among them several years, entitled, Mirabila Dei inter Indicos: Or the Rife and Progress of a remarkable Work of Grace amongst a Number of Indians, in the Provinces of New-Jersey and Pennsylvania.

Situated as we are on this Continent with very extensive frontiers, bordering upon a vast wilderness, inhabited by the native Indians, it becomes a subject worthy the most serious attention of every friend of mankind, every lover of his country, to be truly informed what is the situation and disposition of that people, so far as it may have an influence upon our duty as Christians, and our peace and safety as members of Civil Society; And that we may not make a rash estimate of our own importance, or of the incapacity of those  people for religious improvement, the following observations and quotations are recommended to the serious perusal of every reader, as they give a view of the opinions of some of the early settlers, of different denominations, in this continent.
   The first settlers of Pennsylvania, who had full opportunities of being acquainted with the nature and disposition of the Natives, and who made it a principal point to observe strict justice in all their transactions with them, have left us very favourable memorials of the long continued kindness  they experienced from these people: the great disadvantages to which their ignorance and roving temper subjected them, our forefathers thought it their duty to endeavour to draw them from, by exemplary acts of benevolence and  instruction; which pious practice has since been successfully pursued, by
several well disposed persons in New-England, New-Jersey, and elsewhere: several of whom have transmitted satisfactory accounts of their labours.
   From these publications as well as from the remembrance of some yet  living, it is evident that the natural disposition of the Indians has generally been to mew kindness to the Europeans, in their early settlements; and that their mental powers are equally with our own capable of improvement;  that the apparent difference in them, as well as in the Black People and us, arises principally from the advantages of our education, and manner of life.
   Some writers have represented Indians as naturally ferocious, treacherous, and ungrateful, and endeavoured to establish this character of them, from some particular transaction which hath happened on special occasions: but no conclusion of their original character should be drawn from instances in which they have been provoked, to a degree of fury and vengeance, by unjust and cruel treatment from European aggressors of which most histories of the first settlements on this continent furnish instances, and which writers have endeavoured to colour and vindicate, by reprobating  the character of those poor people.
   It is a matter of fact, proved by most Historical Accounts of the trade carried on with the Indians at our first acquaintance with them, as well as in the first settlements made on this continent, that they generally manifested themselves to be kind, hospitable and generous to the Europeans,  so long as they were treated with justice and humanity; but when the  adventurers from a thirst of gain, over reached the Natives, and they saw some of their friends and relations treacherously entrapped and carried away
to be sold for slaves, themselves injuriously treated and driven from their  native possessions, what could be expected but that such a sordid conduct in the Europeans, would produce a change of disposition in the Indians. The early settlers of New-Jersey have always confirmed the testimony of the  Pennsylvanians, with respected to the good usage they met with from the Indians. The writer of the History of that Province informs us, page 440.   It is well known that the Indians' deportment to each other is peaceable and inoffensive; esteeming sudden anger unbecoming and ignominious; they seldom differ with their neighbour, or do them any harm or injury, except when intoxicated by strong liquor, of which they are fond, to an enormous degree: this is the general character given of Indians, by all impartial writers.
   Is it not notorious that they are generally kinder to us than we are to them? There is scarce an instance occurs, but that they treat every white man, who comes amongst them, with respect; which is not the case from us to them.
   Their modest conduct to women who have been captured by them, is certainly
worthy of commendation, much exceeding what would be expected, in like cases, from the lower class amongst ourselves.
  It is also acknowledged by all impartial persons, who have been conversant
with Indians, that they have generally manifested a faithfulness to the engagements they have entered into for the safety of any person they have undertaken to protect, far exceeding that to be found amongst the generality of white people; as also in the performance of those covenants which they have confirmed by giving belts of wampum.
Something of the same law of retaliation was usual amongst the ancient Jews and Romans.
   From this principle, as well as from the high notions they have of military glory, the young Indians sometimes suddenly pursue violent measures, contrary to the mind of their elders.
      The good disposition of the more southern Indians is sensibly set forth by De las Cafas, Bishop of Chapia, who spent much time and labour in endeavouring to preserve the Indians of New-Spain, from the grievous oppression they laboured under, in his representation to the King and
Council of Spain which, with little variation, may well be applied to the natives of most parts of the continent. 
It is said, that barbarous executions were necessary to punish or check the rebellion of the Americans; but to whom was this owing? did not those people receive the Spaniards who first came amongst them, with gentleness and humanity? did they not shew sshewsew more joy, in proportion, in lavishing treasure  upon them, than the Spaniards did greediness in receiving it? but our avarice was not yet satisfied - tho' they gave up to us their land and their riches, we would take from them their wives, their children, and their liberty.--To blacken these unhappy people, their enemies assert, that they are scarce human creatures--but it is we ought to blush for having been less men, and more barbarous than they. - They are represented as a
stupid people, addicted to vice; but have they not contracted most of their vices from the examples of Christians?  And as to those vices peculiar
to themselves, have not the Christians quickly exceeded them therein? Nevertheless it must be granted, that the Indians still remain untainted with many vices, usual amongst the Europeans; such as ambition, blasphemy, treachery, and many like monsters, which have not yet took place with them; they have scarce an idea of them, so that, in effect, all the advantage we can claim, is to have more elevated notions of things, and our faculties  more unfolded, and more cultivated than theirs. Don't let us flatter our corruptions, nor voluntarily blind ourselves: all nations are equally free: one nation has no right to infringe upon the freedom of another: let us do towards those people, as we would have them to have done to us, if they had landed upon our shore, with the same superiority of strength. And, indeed, why should not things be equal on both sides. How long has the right of the strong been allowed to be the balance of justice. What part of the Gospel
gives a sanction to such a doctrine. In what part of the whole earth did the
Apostles and first promulgators of the Gospel, ever claim a right over the
lives, the freedom, or the substance of the Gentiks.  What a strange method  this of propagating the Gospel, that holy law of grace, which from being  slaves to satan, initiates u into the freedom of the children of God.
  To this pious Bishop's testimony, may be added that of Page Dupart, in his
History of Louisiana, who during a residence of sixteen years, appears to have been careful in his enquiries, relating to the nature and disposition of those several nations seated in a space of 1500 miles on both sides the  Mississipi, with some of whom he was intimately conversant, whom he represents as generally endowed with good sense, kindness and moderation.   He tells us, 
   From him, as also from some other authors, we learn that some of these nations appear but little inclined to war, and there are others who absolutely refuse to take any part therein, but patiently bear the hardships which the violence of other Indians subjects them to, of which good disposition we have had instances amongst ourselves in the case of the Moravian Indians.
   Duprat observes upon the whole, That there needs but prudence and good sense, to persuade the Indians to what is reasonable, and to preserve their friendship without interruption. He adds, We may safely affirm that the differences we have had with them, have been more owing to us than to them.   When they are treated insolently or oppressively, they have no less
sensibility of injuries than others. If those who have occasion to live among
them, will have sentiments of humanity, they will meet in them with men.
   Many more authors might be quoted, declarative of the commendable qualities which have appeared in the Indians, whilst uncorrupted by an intercourse with the Europeans, and which is still the case in the disposition of those nations situated at a distance from us. This particularly appears from accounts left us by Jonathan Carver, who from the year 1766, to the year 1768, inclusive, visited several Nations west of the river Mississipi, and the upper lakes. That governed by the plain and equitable laws of Nature, every one is
remarked solely according to his deserts and their equality, condition,
manners and privileges, with that constant sociable familiarity which prevails thro' every Indian Nation, animates them with a pure and truly  patriotic spirit, that tends to the general good of the Society to which  they belong. The Indians, he says, are not without some sense of Religion, such as proves that they worship the great Creator, with a degree of purity unknown to nations who have greater opportunities of improvement.
   Whilst in the Indian Country, he was instrumental in preventing the Chipeways and Nadoweflis Indians from prosecuting the war, which had during a course of 40 years, subsisted between them. This, the old Indians told him, they had long wished to put an end to; but that their endeavours were frustrated by the young warriors, of either nation, who could not restrain their ardour when they met. They said they should be happy, if some chief of the same pacific disposition as himself, and who possessed an equal degree of resolution and coolness, would settle in the country between the two nations; for by the interference of such a person, an accommodation, which, on their part, they sincerely desired might be brought about. From this circumstance,
as well as what Duprat and others observe of the peaceable disposition of  some of the Indians,  we may well conclude, that susceptible as those untutored people are, to the dictates of reason, if the prossessors of Christianity had, by a proper use of that superior knowledge they were favoured with, honestly laboured, thro' Divine help, to acquaint them with the nature and precepts of the Gospel; to make them sensible of that universal brotherhood that loving, meek, forgiving spirit, which the precepts and example of our Saviour call for, it would have been a matter of the greatest joy both to them and us; but the reverse has happened, except in
a few particular instances; the different denominations of Christians have  rather added, fresh fuel to this false fire, by inciting the poor Natives,  when it has suited their political purpose, to violence amongst themselves, and to become parties in the wars they have waged one against another.
   A disposition to misrepresent and blacken the Indians, in order to justify, or palliate the practice of unjust and cruel measures towards them,  has particularly appeared in the asseding case of those Indians, denominated Moravian Indians, settled on the Muskingum, a branch of the Ohio; who have,  of late, deeply suffered on account of what they thought the peaceable spirit of the Gospel required of them. A true representation of the state and disposition of those Indians, as well as an account of this deplorable
transaction, drawn from the account given by the survivors, appears necessary, as well to rescue those innocent sufferers from the odium which has been so unjustly cast upon them, as to prevent strangers, who may come  amongst us, from forming such erronious ideas of the Natives, as may have an  influence upon the welfare of both them, and the White People.
  The first gathering of those Indians into a good degree of civil and religious order, was about 30 years ago, by means of one of them, named Papunhank. The place of their residence at that time, was at Whihaloosing, on the Susquehanna, about 200 miles from Philadelphia. In the conversation they had with some serious people, in a visit to that city, about the year 1756, at a time when the province was distressed by the Indian war, they appeared to have a feeling sense of that inward change of heart which the
Gospel requires, and declared their particular disapprobation of war, and fixed resolution to take no part therein; apprehending it to be displeasing to the Great Being, who, as one of them expressed it,   They delivered three white prisoners which they had recovered from the other Indians.  They desired that no strong drink should be given them, nor be sent to their town. The speaker, Papunhank, appeared serious, as under a sense of the Divine Presence, and concluded with a solemn prayer, with which the whole audience seemed much affected.
   About 13 years past, these Indians meeting with difficulty, from an encrease of White Settlers near them, by which spirituous liquors were brought to their towns; they removed to the Muskingum, a branch of the Ohio.   In their perigrination thither, they were accompanied by some of the Moravians, who have long resided with them, and by their careful attention, both to their civil and religious concerns, never leaving them, even in the times of their greatest danger and difficulty, a near and steady connection between them took place.
   During the late troubles, these Indians adhering to the principles they had long prosessed, absolutely refused to take any part in the war, notwithstanding the threats and repeated abuses they received on that account from other tribes, particularly those parties which passed thro' their towns,  in their way to our frontiers; whom they sometimes dissuaded from their hostile intentions, and prevailed upon to go back again; or warned the  inhabitants of their danger. This humane conduct being considered as
obstructive to the hostile proceedings of the Tribes at war, was at length made the pretence of carrying them off.  Accordingly, on the 4th of August,  1781, a firing of Wampum was Tent by the Chief of the Wyondats, who resided at Sandusky, with a message, letting them know, He was coming with a number of warriors; but biding them be not afraid, for he was their friend. In a few days after, 220 warriors arrived, when calling a council of the head men of the three Moravian towns, they acquainted them they were come to take them away; renderings for a reason, They returned them this answer: To this, the Chief of the Wyondats, at first, seemed to attend but being instigated by some white men in their company, they persisted in their resolution; and after killing many of the cattle and hogs, ripping up their bedding, and committing many other outrages, on the 28th of August,  and September, forced them from their three towns, in all between 3 and 400 persons; who, after a tedious journey in the wilderness, arrived at a branch  of Sandusky creek, where the body of them were ordered to remain. Some of their principal men were sent to Major Arent Schuyler De Peyster, the English Commander at fort Detroit, who commended them, as a peaceable people, and exhorted them to remain such; but added, That many complaints had been made  of them; that they had given intelligence to his enemies, &c. he had sent  for them; but that his instructions had been exceeded, in the ill-treatment they had received; that however he would provide for them. Thus the matter rested till the spring, 1782, when these Moravian Indians finding corn scarce and dear at Sandusky, desired liberty to return to their settlements, to fetch some of their corn, of which they had left above 200 acres Handing; which when granted, many of them went, among whom were several widows with their children, some of whom had been subjected 10 such extreme want, as to eat the carcases of the dead cattle and horses.
  When the people at and about the Manongahela, understood a number of Indians were at the Moravian towns, they gave out, that the intention of those people was, to fall upon the back inhabitants, which ought to be prevented. Whereupon about 160 men got together, and swimming their horses over the Ohio, came suddenly upon the chief Moravian town. The first person  who appeared, they shot at and wounded, when coming up to him, they found he  was an half Indian, son to John Bull, one of the Moravians, by an Indian  woman, to whom he is regularly married; they killed and scalped him, and proceeded to the town. The Moravian Indians. who were in often in the fields pulling corn, did not run off, as many of them might, if they had been conscious of any offence but came of their own accord, into the town, at the call of the white people, who at first, expressed friendship to them; but soon after, violently seized and bound them, when the Helpers of whom there were five of the most respectable, in the company, and others exhorted the younger, to submission and patience; telling them, they thought their troubles in this world, would soon be at an end, and they would be with
their Saviour. They then sung and prayed together, till they were led out, one after the other, and inhumanly slaughtered; first the men, and then the women. Two boys, who made their escape, related these particulars. One of them lay in the heap of the dead, in a house, and was scalped; but recovering his senses, escaped: the other, who had hid himself under the floor, was an eye-witness of this tragic scene, and saw die blood of the slain running in a stream. These Indians before being bound, were so little apprehensive of being charged with guilt, that they informed the White People, that more of their brethren were at another town to which they accompanied them; who in like manner fell a sacrifice with them, to the barbarity of the whites. The dead bodies were afterwards burned with the houses. Before their death, they were also obliged to shew in what part of the woods they had concealed their effects, when the other Indians (as before mentioned) took them away.
   Those at the third town having some intelligence of what passed, made their escape. One of the Helpers, who escaped relates, That in a conference they had with the other Helpers, when they considered what they should do in case of an attack, either from the Americans, or the Indians, who had taken part with the English, some of whom charged them of having, thro' the  intelligence they gave to the Virginians, been the occasion of the Daughter   of their brethren, at Goschaching, the result of their conference was, "Not to go away, nevertheless to leave each one to according to the feeling of his own heart. He added, That there was so much love amongst them, that he had never felt the like before."  This is a summary of this dreadful transaction, as it is given by the principle leader of those that remain.
  It is alledged, in vindication of this deliberate massacre, that 40 of those Indians were warriors, preparing to attack our frontiers; but this assertion contradicts itself: for had it been the case, it is not likely they would have brought their wives, with the widows, and 34 children, who were slain with them, or have suffered them with themselves, to be thus murdered, without making the least resistance, or hurt to their murderers.
  Soon after the death of these Indians, about 500 men, probably encouraged by this easy conquest assembled at the old Mingos on the west side of the Ohio, and being equipped, on horseback, set on for Sandusky, where the remaining part of the Moravian Indians resided, in order to destroy that settlement, and other Indian towns in those parts; but the Wyandots, and other Indians, having some knowledge of their approach, met them near
Sandusky, when an engagement ensued, in which some of the assailants were killed, and several taken prisoners, amongst whom was the Commander Col. Crawford, and his son-in-law. The Col. The Indians put to a cruel death, and killed the other, with other prisoners.
   Doubtless the cruelty  exercised on the Col. and the death of the prisoners taken at Sandusky, was, in a great measure, owing to the murder of the peaceable Moravian Indians, at which they expressed much displeasure.
   This grievous transaction appears in a yet more afflictive point of view, when it is considered, that tho' many threats had been thrown out against those Indians, both by the English and Americans, yet they took no step for their security, trusting in the care of Heaven, and the protection of the government, under which they had lived many years with due submission. But such is the corrupting nature of war, that it gradually hardens the heart, to a fearful degree of insensibility. Yet surely a time of rousing must come, when, if not given up to obduracy, equal to their delusion, the blood of these innocent people will be heavy upon all concerned in the shedding of it.
  We cry out against Indian cruelty; but is any thing which Indians have done, (all circumstances considered) more inconsistent with justice, reason, and humanity, than the murder of those Moravian Indians; a peaceable, innocent people, whose conduct, even when under the scalping-knife, evidenced a dependance on Divine Help for support, as much
becoming Christians, as their sufferings in support of their religious  principles, and have nothing to do with the war. We desire and request no more, than that we may be permitted to live in peace and quiet. We will preserve your words and consider them and their fidelity to the government had before manifested them to be our special friends.
  In vindication of this barbarous transaction, endeavours have been used, to make us believe, that the whole race of Indians are a people prone to every vice, and destitute of every virtue; and without a capacity for improvement.  What is this but blasphemously to arraign the wisdom of our Creator, and insinuate, that the existence He has given them, is incompatible with his moral government of the world.  But this must be admitted to make way for the proposal of endeavouring the universal extirpation of Indians from the face of the earth. Such, alas is the manner in which too many of the pretended followers, of the meek and suffering Saviour of the world, would fulfil the   prophecy concerning him. Now so far as we know the prevailance of this spirit of love and forgiveness, over the pride and wrath of our hearts, so far are we the disciples and followers of Christ; and so far only, can we truly pray for, and witness the coming of His kingdom: and on the other hand, so far as we are subject to a vindictive and unforgiving spirit, so far we are in a  state of a nation from God, and reprobate concerning a true faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, which works only by love, to the purifying of the heart from every disposition of a contrary nature. Was this distinction always observed in our religious discriminations of mankind, we should get thro' abundance of frivolous and superficial prejudices which divide the Christian World, and be convinced, that it is not the colour of our skins, outward circumstances or prosession, but the state and temper of the mind and will, which makes us Jews or Gentiles; Christians or Heathens; Elect or Reprobate, in the sight of God. That this change of heart is the sure effect of the coming of Christ's kingdom, was evidenced in many of those Indians, whose case is here represented who, by yielding to the operations of Divine Grace, were brought to an entire reformation of mind and manners. That savage ferocity, with all those dazzling notions of honour, to be gained from the destruction of mankind, so natural to the fallen sons of Adam, have gradually melted away
in these Indians, into a frame of meekness, humility and love, which supported them in that lamb-like submission, under that remarkable succession of trials and afflictions which was permitted to attend them; whereby many of them are at length put beyond the reach of enmity.
   We are told by a late Author, who appears zealous for the extirpation of all Indians, That this is not a just character of Indians, all, who are acquainted with that people, can testify: yet there are, doubtless, ill-disposed people amongst them, as well as amongst us, who under the dreadful power of strong drink, (which has an uncommon bad effect on them) may be led into the greatest enormities. Nevertheless, as has been  mentioned, impartial men, who from good views, have visited or resided with them, represent them in a very different light: as Charlevoix, and other French and Spanish Authors : John Elliott, Thomas Mayew; John Sergeant, in New-England; David Brainard and others in the Jerseys; and more lately the Moravians in different parts. These have spent much time and labour for the civil and religious improvement of the Natives, in which they all expressed satisfaction and comfort.
   And it is worthy of peculiar notice, that in the wars the Indians have waged upon our frontiers, there has scarce been an instance of any of those Indians, who had made a serious prosession of the Christian Religion, having been concerned in the barbarous eruptions against us. These have generally put themselves under the protection of their several governments; as former instances in New-England, and the instance of the Moravian Indians, both in the former, and late war, will undoubtedly evince.
   The people of Pennsylvania, and New-Jerseys, as has been already noted, have had full opportunity to experience the good disposition and kindness of the Indians, so long as they were treated with justice and humanity, as particularly appears from the many striking instances of probity, gratitude and beneficence, on record, at a time when the disparity of their numbers was so great, that they might have easily destroyed the settlers, had they been so minded. But so far were they from molesting them, that they were rather as nursing fathers to them; granting them ample room for settlements; freely assisting them with the means of living, at easy rates; manifesting, thro' a long course of years, a strict care and fidelity in observing their treaties, and fulfilling their other engagements; which there is the greatest reason to conclude would still be the case, in every part of the continent, if the same
equitable and kind measures were pursued.
   Upon the whole, it is a matter of undoubted persuasion, with impartial people, who have been conversant with Indians, that if their dipositions and natural powers are duly considered, they will be found to be equally with our own, capable of improvement in knowledge and virtue, and that the apparent difference between us and them, is chiefly owing to our different ways of life, and different ideas of what is necessary and desirable, and the advantage of education, which puts it in our  power to gloss over our own conduct, however evil; and to set theirs, however defensible, in the most
odious point of light.
   Much of their blamable conduct, now complained of, is certainty imputable to a long continued train of fraudulent and corrupt practices, in our intercourse with them, especially, the fatal introduction of strong drink, of which they have often complained, and desired it might not be brought amongst them, by which instead of allaying the ferment of corrupt nature, by a good example, and the good instruction, which our superior knowledge would enable us to give them, too many have been instrumental in working them up to a state of distraction, which when it has burst forth in vengeance upon ourselves, is made a pretence for destroying them, as tho' they were wholly the aggressors.
   That Indians may be tempted or provoked to the perpetration of great evils, by the intemperate love and use of strong liquors, is easily conceived; but whether, they, who, to gratify the cravings of sordid avarice, furnish them with the intoxicating potion, and then take advantage of their situation, to impose upon them, and tempt them to evil, are not principally accountable, for the crimes they commit, and their consequences, is not a query worthy of their most awful consideration.
   Had the views of the inhabitants of the colonies, been more just and wife,
and their conduct towards the Natives regulated by a benevolence worthy of the Christian Name, every reasonable purpose of settling in their country, might have been fully  accomplished, and they at the same time become, generally, as well civilized, as those few who were under the care of the Moravians, at the Muskingum.
   The accounts of the wicked policy and cruelties exercised by the Spaniards
upon their Indians, we read with horror, without considering how far ourselves are in a degree guilty of something of the same.
   How many peaceable Indians, residing amongst us, have formerly as well as
lately, been murdered, with impunity, to satisfy the rage of angry men, tho'
under the protection  of the law, without any attonement being made. 
   What destruction both of Indians and others, thro' a violent infringement on what they apprehended to be their rights. What dreadful havock has the desire of gain made amongst them, by the sale of spirituous liquors, &c. &c.  Surely this must be accounted for, when an inquisition for blood takes place.   Indeed interest, as well as duty, should induce the people, in general, to endeavour the bringing the Indians off from those false habits and prejudices, which are as obstructive to their own happiness, as they are dangerous to ours.
  To what degree of distress, a few Indians can reduce a country, let the Annals of New-England testify, particularly by the long and distressing wars with the Eastern Tribes, who upon the making a peace with them, were found to
be so small a number, that it occasioned the celebrated Cotton Mather, to take up the following lamentation: "Surely we had smitten the  whole army  of the Indians, that fought against us, twenty-three years ago, from one end  of the land to the other; only there were left a few wounded amongst them in  the east, and now they have risen up, every man, and have set the whole country on fire. Certainly a more humbling matter cannot be related.   Moreover, is it not a very humbling thing, that when about an hundred Indians  begin a war upon all these populous: colonies, an army of a thousand English raised, must not kill one of them all, but instead thereof, more of our soldiers perished by sickness and hardships, than we had enemies in the world. Our God has humbled us. Is it not a very humbling thing, that when the number of our enemies afterwards increasing, yet an handful of them should, for so many summers together, continue our unconquered spoilers, and put us to such vast charges, that if we would have bought them for an hundred pounds  a head, we should have made a saving bargain of it. Our God has humbled us." 
   What  an instructive lesson may the rulers of government, and the people,
gather from this pathetic lamentation; how ought it to induce us diligently to labour for the maintenance of Peace and Friendship with all our Indian  neighbours.
  How ought we to look up to God, the common Father of the family of mankind, requesting he would enable us to sow the seeds of Benevolence and Mercy, carefully avoiding those of War and Destruction.
  It was, very probably, the want of such a care in the people of New-England, particularly in the lamentable destruction of the Pequot Indians,  tho' perpetrated many years before, which produced the grievous crop of calamity and distress here complained of; for however time and changes may  veil past transactions, and remove them from sight, and the remembrance of men, yet they will remain, as present, in the view of Divine Purity; and whilst unrepented of, will, tho' covered, as with dirt, and dross, remain as engraven on a rock, which when the overflowing stream prevails, and that time of general inquiry, comes, when secret things shall be revealed, will appear as a testimony against transgressors.
   The Annals of New-England informs us, that the first settlers met with kind treatment from the Natives, even when they were few, and so sickly, that in the first winter, one half of their number died. 
   It was about fifteen years after, when the settlement on the Connecticut river, was making speedy advances towards the country of the Pequots, that differences arose between those Indians and the English; some traders were killed, whether thro' the fault of the Indians, or White People, is uncertain, as each blamed the other; the Indians, however, shewed a great desire to maintain peace between them and the English, for which purpose
Neal observes, "They twice sent deputies to Boston, with presents" which
might with patience and forbearance, thro' the blessing of God, have been improved; but the English insisting on the delivery of the persons concerned, which the Indians delaying to comply with, perhaps for want of power, the English fell upon them, slew several, firing their wigwams, and spoiling their corn, &c which enraged the Indians to such a degree, that, giving up their endeavours for peace, they attacked the fort on Connecticut river; slew several persons; and carried away two maidens, who were afterwards returned.  Upon this, the different New-England governments concluded to unite their forces, to destroy those Indians; which was so effectually done, that Captain Underhill, who was a principal Commander in that expedition, in his book intitled News from America, page 2, tells us.
   This account of the destruction of the Pequot Indians, is by no means intended as a reflection on the people of New-England; sensible, that it is now long since many amongst them, have been foremot in furnishing instances  of the blessing attendant on the extension of friendly measures, and a commendable care for the civil and religious welfare of the Indians; as well as they have of late years, shewn an examplary and praise-worthy concern for doing justice to the oppressed Africans: but only for this necessary purpose, that the  dreadful experience of former times, may be, as instructive  cautions in our future transaction.
  Neat, page 25, observes, relating to those Pequot Indians, that they made a noble stand against the united force of New-England, and would certainly have defended  their country against the encroachment of the English, if the
Nanagansets, their inveterate enemies, had not assisted the English to destroy them, actions with our Indian neighbours, in the several settlements now likely to be made on lands belonging to them, or claimed by them.   Indeed we cannot be too weighty in considering how we lay our foundation for future happiness or misery; as our Saviour's declaration will be verified often, in time, and certainly in eternity: That as we sow we shall reap;   and with that measure we meet, it shall be measured to us again; And altho' the children are not accountable for the iniquity of their fathers; yet
where the children are basking and rejoicing in the ease and plenty they enjoy thro' the sins of their fathers, as is peculiarly the case of those, who are possessed of estates procured by hard measures towards Indians, or thro' the oppression of the Negroes; these as they rejoice in those possessions, which the SIN has produced, cannot expect other wise than, to be partakers in the PLAGUE.
   Upon the whole, if the peace and safety of the inhabitants of our wide extended frontiers, the lives and welfare of so many innocent and helpless  people, depends on the maintenance of a friendly intercourse with our Indian  neighbours, what greater instances of patriotism, of love to God and  mankind, can be shewn, than to promote, to the utmost of our power, not only  the civilization of these uncultivated people, whom Providence has, as it were, cast under our care; but also their establishment, in a pious and virtuous life. On the other hand, what greater injury can be done to our country, than to diffuse, amongst the thoughtless part of the people, a disposition, and promote a conduct, tending not only to deprive us of the advantage, which a friendly intercourse with them may produce; but by raising their enmity and wrath, expose the country to those grievous calamities, which an Indian war often has, and will again, undoubtedly produce.

