CAUTION TO GREAT BRITAIN AND HER COLONIES,
IN A SHORT REPRESENTATION of  the CALAMITOUS STATE of the
ENSLAVED NEGROES IN THE BRITISH DOMINIONS.
By ANTHONY BENEZET.
1785
AT a time when the general rights and liberties of mankind, and the preservation of those valuable privileges transmitted to us from our ancestors, are become so much the subjects of universal consideration; can it be an inquiry indifferent to any, how many of those who distinguish themselves as the Advocates of Liberty, remain insensible and inattentive to the treatment of thousands and tens of thousands of our fellowmen, who, from motives of avarice, and the inexorable decree of tyrant custom, are at this very time kept in the most deplorable state of Slavery, in many parts of the British Dominions?
The intent of publishing the following sheets, is more fully to make known the
aggravated iniquity attending the practice of the Slave-trade; whereby many thousands of
our fellow-creatures, as free as ourselves by nature, and equally with us the subjects of Christ's redeeming Grace, are yearly brought into inextricable and barbarous bondage; and many, very many, to miserable and untimely ends.

The Truth of this lamentable Complaint is so obvious to persons of candour, under whose
notice it hath fallen, that several have lately published their sentiments thereon, as a matter which calls for the most serious consideration of all who are concerned for the civil or religious welfare of their Country. How an evil of so deep a dye, hath so long, not only passed uninterrupted by those in Power, but hath even had their Countenance, is indeed surprising; and charity would suppose, must in a great measure have arisen, from this, that many persons in government, both of the Clergy and Laity, in whose power it hath been to put a stop to the Trade, have been unacquainted with the corrupt motives which give life to it, and with the groans the dying groans, which daily ascend to God, the common Father of mankind, from the broken hearts of those his deeply oppressed creatures: otherwise the powers of the earth would not, I think I may venture to say could not, have so long authorized a practice so inconsistent with every idea of liberty and justice, which, as the learned James Foster says, Bids that God, which is the God and Father of the Gentiles, unconverted to Christianity, most daring and bold defiance; and spurns at all the principles both of natural and revealed Religion,

Much might justly be said of the temporal evils which attend this practice, as it is destructive of the welfare of human society, and of the peace and prosperity of every country, in proportion at it prevails. It might be also shewn, that it destroys the bonds of natural affection and interest, whereby mankind in general are united; that it introduces idleness, discourages marriage, corrupts the youth, ruins and debauches morals, excites continual apprehensions of dangers, and frequent alarms, to which the Whites are necessarily exposed from so great an increase of a People, that, by their Bondage and Oppressions, become natural enemies, yet, at the same time, are filling the places and eating the bread of those who would be the Support and Security of the Country. But as these and many more reflections of the fame kind may occur to a considerate mind, I shall only endeavour to shew, from the nature of the Trade, the plenty which Guinea affords to its inhabitants, the barbarous Treatment of the Negroes, and the
Observations made thereon by Authors of note, that it is inconsistent with the plainest Precepts of the Gospel, the dictates of reason, and every common sentiment of humanity.
Some who have only seen Negroes in an abject state of slavery, broken-spirited and
dejected, knowing nothing of their situation in their native country, may apprehend, that
they are naturally insensible of the benefits of Liberty, being destitute and miserable in every respect, and that our suffering them to live amongst us (as the Gibeonites of old were permitted to live with the Israelites) though even on more oppressive terms, is to them a favour; but these are certainly erroneous opinions, with respect to far the greatest part of them: Although it is highly probable that in a country which is more than three thousand miles in extent from north to south, and as much from east to west, there will be barren parts, and many inhabitants more uncivilized and barbarous than others; as is the case in all other countries: yet, from the most authentic accounts, the inhabitants of Guinea appear, generally speaking, to be an industrious, humane, sociable people, whose capacities are naturally as enlarged, and as open to improvement, as those of the Europeans; and that their Country is fruitful, and in many places well improved, abounding in cattle, grain and fruits. And as the earth yields all the year round a fresh supply of food, and but little clothing is requisite, by reason of the continual warmth of the climate; the necessaries of life are much easier procured in most parts of Africa, than in our more northern climes.
From these Accounts, both of the good Disposition of the Natives, and the Fruitfulness of most parts of Guinea, which are confirmed by many other Authors, it may well be concluded, that their acquaintance with the Europeans would have been a happiness
to them, had those last not only borne the name, but indeed been influenced by the
Spirit of Christianity; but, alas! how hath the Conduct of the Whites contradicted the
Precepts and Example of Christ? Instead of promoting the End of his Coming, by preaching the Gospel of Peace and Good-will to Man, they have, by their practices, contributed to enflame every noxious passion of corrupt nature in the Negroes; they have incited them to make war one upon another, and for this purpose have furnished them
with prodigious quantities of ammunition and arms, whereby they have been hurried into
confusion, bloodshed, and all the extremities of temporal misery, which must necessarily
beget in their minds such a general detestation and scorn of the Christian name, as may
deeply affect, if not wholly preclude, their belief of the great Truths of our holy Religion. Thus an insatiable desire of gain hath become the principal and moving cause of
the most abominable and dreadful scene, that was perhaps ever acted upon the face of the
earth; even the power of their Kings hath been made subservient to answer this wicked
purpose; instead of being Protectors of their people, these Rulers, allured by the tempting bait laid before them by the European Factors, &c. have invaded the Liberties of their unhappy subjects, and are become their Oppressors.

Divers accounts have already appeared in print, declarative of the shocking wickedness
with which this Trade is carried on; these may not have fallen into the hands of some
of my readers, I shall, therefore, for their information, select a few of the most remarkable instances that I have met with, shewing the method by which the Trade is commonly managed all along the African coast.
Those who are acquainted with the Trade agree, that many Negroes on the sea-coast,
who have been corrupted by their intercourse and converse with the European Factors, have learnt to stick at no act of cruelty for gain. These make it a practice to steal abundance of little Blacks of both sexes, when found on the roads or in the fields, where their parents keep them all day to watch the corn, &c. Some authors say, the Negroe Factors go six or seven hundred miles up the country with goods, bought from the Europeans, where markets of men are kept in the same manner as those of beasts with us. When the poor slaves, whether brought from far or near, come to the sea-shore, they are stripped naked, and strictly examined by the European Surgeons, both men and women, without the least distinction or modesty; those which are approved as good, are marked with a red-hot iron with the ship's mark; after which they are put on board the vessels, the men being shackled with irons two and two together. Reader, bring the matter home,
and consider whether any situation in life can be more completely miserable than that of
those distressed captives. When we reflect, that each individual of this number had some
tender attachment which was broken by this cruel separation; some parent or wife, who
had not an opportunity of mingling tears in a parting embrace; perhaps some infant or
aged parent whom his labour was to feed and vigilance protect; themselves under the
dreadful apprehension of an unknown perpetual slavery; pent up within the narrow
confines of a vessel, sometimes six or seven hundred together, where they lie as close as
possible. Under these complicated distresses they are often reduced to a state of desperation, wherein many have leaped into the sea, and have kept themselves under water till they were drowned; others have starved themselves to death, for the prevention
whereof some masters of vessels have cut off the legs and arms of a number of those poor
desperate creatures, to terrify the rest. Great numbers have also frequently been killed,
and some deliberately put to death under the greatest torture, when they have attempted
to rise, in order to free themselves from their present misery, and the slavery designed
them. An instance of the last kind appears particularly in an account given by. the
master of a vessel, who brought a cargo of slaves to Barbadoes; indeed it appears so
irreconcileable to the common dictates of humanity, that one would doubt the truth
of it, had it not been related by a serious person of undoubted credit, who had it from
the captain's own mouth. Upon an enquiry, What had been the success of his voyage?
As detestable and shocking as this may appear to such, whose hearts are not yet hardened by the practice of that cruelty, which the love of wealth, by degrees, introduceth
into the human mind; it will not be strange to those who have been concerned or employed in the Trade. Now here arises a necessary query to those who hold the balance and sword of justice; and who must account to God for the use they have made of it. Since our English law is so truly valuable for its justice, bow can they overlook these barbarous deaths of the unhappy Africans without trial, or due proof of their being guilty, of crimes adequate to their punishment? Why are those masters of vessels, (who are often not the most tender and considerate of men) thus suffered to be the sovereign arbiters of the lives of the miserable Negroes; and allowed, with impunity, thus to destroy, may I not say, murder their fellow-creatures, and that by means so cruel, as cannot be even related but with shame and horror?
When the vessels arrive at their destined port in the Colonies, the poor Negroes are to
be disposed of to the planters; and here they are again exposed naked, without any distinction of sexes, to the brutal examination of their purchasers; and this, it may well be
judged, is to many of them another occasion of deep distress, especially to the females.
Add to this, that near connections must now again be separated, to go with their several
purchasers: In this melancholy scene Mothers are seen hanging over their Daughters, bedewing their naked breasts with tears, and Daughters clinging to their Parents; not
knowing what new stage of distress must follow their separation, or if ever they shall
meet again: And here what sympathy, what commiseration are they to expect? why in-
deed, if they will not separate as readily as their owners think proper, the whipper is
called for, and the lash exercised upon their naked bodies, till obliged to part.
Can any human heart, that retains a fellow-feeling for the Sufferings of mankind, be
unconcerned at relations of such grievous affliction, to which this oppressed part of our
Species are subjected: God gave to man dominion over the fish of the sea, and over
the fowls of the air, and over the cattle, &c. but imposed no involuntary subjection of one
man to another.
In a book printed in Liverpool, called The Leverpool Memorandum- book, which contains, among other things, an account of the Trade of that port, there is an exact list of the vessels employed in the Guinea Trade, and of the number of Slaves imported in each
vessel, by which it appears, that in the year 1753, the number imported to America, by
by vessels belonging to that port, amounted to upwards of Thirty Thousand; and from the
number of Vessels employed by the African Company in London and Bristol, we may,
with some degree of certainty conclude, there is, at least, One Hundred Thousand
Negroes purchased and brought on board our ships yearly from the coast of Africa, on
their account. When the vessels are full freighted with slaves, they set out for our plantations in America, and may be two or three months on the voyage, during which time, from the filth and stench that is distempers frequently break out, which carry off a great many, a fifth, a fourth, yea, sometimes a third of them; so that taking all the slaves together that are brought on board our ships yearly one may reasonably suppose, that at least ten thousand of them die on the voyage. And in a printed account of the State of the Negroes in our plantations, it is supposed that a fourth part, more or less, die at the different Islands, in what is called the seasoning. Hence it may be presumed, that, at a moderate computation of the slaves, who are purchased by our African merchants in a year, near thirty thousand die upon the voyage and in the seasoning. Add to this, the
prodigious number who are killed in the incursions and intestine wars, by which the
Negroes procure the number-of slaves wanted to load the vessels. How dreadful then is this Slave-Trade, whereby so many thousands of our fellow-creatures, free by nature, endued with the same rational faculties, and called to be heirs of the same salvation with us, lose their lives, and are truly; and properly speaking, murdered every year! For it is not necessary, in order to , convict a man of murder, to make it appear, that he had an
intention to commit murder. Whoever does, by unjust force or violence, deprive another
of his Liberty and, while he has him in his power, reduces him, by cruel treatment, to
such a condition as evidently endangers his life, and the event occasions his death, is
actually guilty of murder. It is no less shocking to read the accounts given by Sir Hans
Sloane and others, of the inhuman and unmerciful treatment those Blacks meet with,
who survive the seasonings in the Islands, often for transgressions, to which the punishment they receive bears no proportion.
Thus they are brought to expire, with frightful agonies, in the most horrid tortures, for negligence only they are unmercifully whipped, till their backs are raw, and then pepper and salt is scattered on the wounds to heighten the pain, and prevent mortification. Is it not a cause of much sorrow and lamentation, that so many poor creatures should be thus racked with excruciating tortures, for crimes which often their tormentors have occasioned? Must not even the common feelings of human nature have suffered some  to be capable of such horrid cruelty towards their fellow-men? If they deserve death, ought not their judges, in the death decreed them, always to remember that these their hapless fellow-creatures are men, and themselves professing Christians? The Mosaic law teaches us our duty in these cases, in the merciful provision it made in the punishment of transgressors. Britains boast themselves to be a generous, humane people, who have a true sense of the importance of Liberty; but is this a true character, whilst that barbarous, savage Slave-Trade, with all its attendant horrors, receives countenance and protection from the Legislature, whereby so many Thousand lives are yearly sacrificed? Do we indeed believe the truths declared in the Gospel? Are we persuaded that the threatenings, as well as the promises therein contained, will have their accomplishment? If indeed we do, must we not tremble to think what a load of guilt lies upon our Nation generally, and individually, so far as we in any degree abet of countenance this aggravated iniquity?
