 I feel myself happy to be at last brought before a court, and before judges, whose
characteristic is the love of liberty. I have many humble thanks to return for the immediate order you were pleased to issue, to give me an opportunity of laying my grievances before you. They are of a kind hitherto unparalleled in this free country, and I trust the consequences will teach ministers of Scottish and arbitrary principles, that the liberty of an English subject is not to be sported away with impunity, in this cruel and despotic manner.
I am accused of being the author of the North Briton, No. 45. I shall only remark upon that paper, that it takes all load of accusation from the sacred name of a Prince, whose family I love and honour, as the glorious defenders of the cause of liberty, and whose personal qualities are so amiable, great, and respectable, that he is deservedly the idol
of his people. It is the peculiar fashion and crime of these times, and of those who hold
high ministerial offices in government, to throw every odious charge from themselves
upon Majesty. The author of this paper, whoever he may be, has, upon constitutional
principles, done directly the reverse, and is therefore in me the supposed author, meant
to be persecuted accordingly. The particular cruelties of my treatment, worse than if I
had been a Scottish rebel, this court will hear, and I dare say, from your justice, in duetime redress.
 I may perhaps still have the means left me to shew that t have been superior to every
temptation of corruption. They may indeed have nattered themselves, that when they
found corruption could not prevail, persecution might intimidate. I will shew myself
superior to both. My papers have been seized, perhaps with a hope the better to
deprive me of that proof of their meanness and corrupt prodigality, which it may possibly, in a proper place, be yet in my power to give.
 I have this moment the honour of your lordship's letter, signifying his Majesty's commands that I should no longer continue colonel of the militia for the county of Buckingham. I have only to return your lordship my warmest thanks for the spirit and zeal you have shewn in the support of that constitutional measure from the very beginning.
Your lordship will please to remember, that I was amongst the foremost who offered their
services to their country at that crisis. Buckingham is sensible, and has always acknowledged, that no man but your lordship could have given success to that measure in our inland county. I am proud of the testimony your lordship is pleased to give me, and am happy, in these days of peace, to leave so excellent a corps in that perfect harmony,
which has from the beginning subsisted.
'I have the honour to be,
with unfeigned respect,
My lord, your lordship's
most obedient and
most humble servant,
4May5, 1763 JOHN WILKES
Far be it from me to regret that I have passed so many more days in captivity, as it will have afforded you an opportunity of doing, upon mature reflection, and repeated
examination, the more signal justice to my country. The liberty of all peers and gentlemen, and what touches me more sensibly, that of all the middling and inferior set of people, who stand most in need of protection, is in my case this day to be finally decided upon: a question of such importance as to determine at once, whether English liberty be a reality or a shadow. Your own free-born hearts will feel with indignation and compassion, all that load of oppression under which I have so long laboured. Close
imprisonment, the effect of premeditated malice; all access for more than two days denied to me; my house ransacked and plundered ; my most private and secret concerns
divulged; every vile and malignant insinuation, even of high treason itself, no less industrioufly than falsely circulated, by my cruel and implacable enemies, together with
all the various insolence of office, form but a part of my unexampled ill treatment.
Such inhuman principles of star-chamber tyranny, will, I trust, by this court, upon
this solemn occasion, be finally extirpated, and henceforth every innocent man, however poor and unsupported, may hope to sleep in peace and security in his own house, unviolated by King's messengers, and the arbitrary mandates of an overbearing secretary of state.
I will no longer delay your justice. The nation is impatient to hear, nor can be safe or happy till that is obtained. If the same persecution is, after all, to carry me before another court, I hope I shall find that the genuine spirit of Magna Charta, that glorious inheritance, that distinguishing characteristic of Englishmen, is as religiously revered there, as I know it is here, by the great personages, before whom I have now the
happiness to stand; and (as in the ever-memorable case of the imprisoned bishops) an
independent jury of free-born Englishmen will persist to determine my sate, as in conscience bound, upon constitutional principles, by a verdict of guilty or not guilty. I ask no more at the hands of my countrymen.

Great as my joy must naturally be at the decision which this court, with a true spirit of liberty, has been pleased to make concerning the unwarrantable seizure of my person, and
all the other consequential grievances, allow me to assure you that I feel it far less sensibly on my awn account, than I do for the public.
The sufferings of an individual are a trifling object, when compared with the whole, and I
should blush to feel for myself in comparison with considerations of a nature so transcendently superior.
I will not trouble you with my poor thanks. Thanks are due to you from the whole English nation, and from all the subjects of the English crown. They will be paid you, together with every testimony of zeal and affection to the learned Serjeant, who has so ably and so constitutionally pleaded my cause, and in mine (with pleasure I say it) the cause as liberty. Every testimony of my gratitude is justly due to you, and I take leave of this court with a veneration and respect, which no time can obliterate, nor can the most grateful heart sufficiently express.

Little did I expect, when I was requiring from your lordships what an Englishman has
a right to, his property taken from him, and said to he in your lordships possession, that I should have received in answer, from persons in your high station, the expressions of indecent and scurrilous applied to my legal demands. The respect I bear to his Majesty, whose servants it- seems you still are, though you stand legally convicted of having in me violated, in the highest and most offensive manner, the liberties of all the commons of England, prevents my returning you an answer in the same Billingsgate language. If I considered you only in your private capacities, I should treat you both according to your deserts: but where is the wonder that men, who have attacked the sacred liberty of the subject, and have issued an illegal warrant to seize his property, should proceed to such libellous expressions? You say, "that such of my papers shall be restored to me, as do not lead to a proof of my guilt." I owe this to your apprehension of an action, not to your love of justice; and in that light, if I can believe your lordships assurances, the whole will be returned to me.
 I fear neither your prosecution nor your persecution; and I will assert the security of my own house, the liberty of my person, and every right of the people, not so much for my own sake, as for the sake of every one of my English fellow subjects.
 I am, my lords,
your humble servant,
JOHN WILKES.

 I think it my duty to lay before the house a few facts, which have occurred since our
last meeting; because, in my humble opinion, (which I shall always submit to this
house) the rights of all the Commons of England, and the privileges of parliament have, in my person, been highly violated. I shall at present content myself with barely
stating the fact, and leave the mode of proceeding to the wisdom of the house.
On the 30th of April, in the morning, I was made a prisoner in my own house, by
some of the King's messengers. I demanded by what authority they had forced their way
into my room, and was shewn a warrant in which no person was named in particular,
but generally the authors, printers and publishers of a seditious and treasonable paper entitled, The North Briton, No. 45. The messengers insisted on my going before lord
Halifax, which I absolutely refused, because the warrant was, I thought, illegal, and did
not respect me. I applied by my friends, to the court of Common Pleas, for a Habeas
Corpus, which was granted ; but as the proper office was not then open, it could not
immediately issue. I was afterwards carried, by violence, before the earls of Egremont and Halifax, whom I informed of the orders given by the court of Common Pleas for the
Habeas Corpus ; and I enlarged upon this subject to Mr. Webb, the solicitor of the
treasury. I was, however, hurried away to the Tower by another warrant, which declared me the author and publisher of a most infamous and seditious libel, intitled, the North Briton, No. 45. The word treasonable was dropped, yet I was detained a close prisoner, and no person was suffered to come near me, for almost three days, although my council, and several of my .friends, demanded admittance, in order to concert the means of recovering my liberty. My house was plundered, my bureaus broke open, by order of two of your members, Mr. Wood and Mr. Webb, and all my papers carried away. After six days imprisonment I was discharged, by the unanimous judgment of the court of Common Pleas, that the privilege of this house extended to my case. Notwithstanding this solemn decision of one of the King's superior courts of justice, a few days after I was served with a subpœna upon an information exhibited against me in the King's Bench. I lost no time in consulting the best books, as well as the greatest living authorities ; and from the truest judgment I could form, I thought that the serving me with a subpœna was another violation of the privilege of parliament, which I will neither desert nor betray, and therefore I have not yet entered an appearance.
I now stand in the judgment of the house, submitting, with the utmost deference, the whole case to their justice and wisdom; and beg leave to add, that if, after this important
business has in its full extent been maturely weighed, you shall be of opinion, that I am
intitled to privilege, I shall then be not only ready, but eagerly desirous, to wave that
privilege, and to put myself upon a jury of my countrymen.

I have the favour of your letter, and of the papers inclosed. I think you are rather deficient in politeness, that you do not congratulate your friend on the new and singular honour done him by the House of Commons in appointing a physician and surgeon to attend me. I ought to take this the more kindly at their hands, because to pay me this compliment, they have, I believe, exceeded their legal powers. The lords, rather unwittingly, set them such an example, by ordering the physician and surgeon of a member of the other house to their bar, to be examined concerning his state of health. I had before received other unmerited obligations from their lordships, and the old friendship of lord Sandwich, though I own I was rather put to the blush by their publishing to the world what they pretended was found, perhaps put, among the things stolen from me.
If a man makes a private essay on woman, should all the world see it? Is a treatise against the spleen, or the tadium vita, so dangerous as now to become a state-crime for the cognizance of our present cruel rulers, or rather inquisitors? Has the nasty, gummy, blubbering, overgrown boy of a lord, barbarous and blustering as the North, has he likewise received his orders to denounce to the Commons a laughable poem as a horrid crime to make all good Christians shudder? Are the most wretched and impious lines to be forged, that a work, which idolizes the whole sex, may be brought into judgment Lord North before the crafty Scot, who never loved any woman.
 This last act of the majority seems almost to perfect the scene, and really quite overwhelm me with gratitude. Yet though I am a young member, I cannot but observe and lament, that the antient established forms of parliament have in the present case been laid aside, as if order had taken leave of the House with good old Onslow. The course
of business has always been, that affairs of importance should previously go to a committee, to have a full and fair discussion, and afterwards the house receives and duly weighs the report of the committee. The affair you have mentioned is of so much real consequence, that it should, in my poor opinion, have been referred to the two usual committees. First, it should have gone to the committee of ways and means, to contrive how the state physician and surgeon can get into my house. Secondly, to the committee of supply, to vote the fees due to the gentlemen for their attendance; but I have public œconomy so much at heart, though I make no parade of it, that I will save the nation this expence, for I will not suffer either of them to enter my doors. The majority of the Commons, like true country people, seem to have a troublesome overflowing of kindness for me, which you know is very apt to surfeit. Yet, like the others sometimes, in the same moment they sail in a point of necessary good breeding, even to one of their own members. The house desires doctor Hebberden and Mr. Hawkins to come to me, but forget to desire me to receive them, and I most certainly will not.
 Surely, my dear Sir, this matter has been too lightly determined upon by the honourable
house. It is pretty well known that I have already a physician and surgeon^ whose characters the foul breath of slander never reached, and whom I confide in and love. Why
should I admit any others? Am I to consent to an unjust slur upon gentlemen with whom
I have all the reason in the world to be satisfied? Shall I concur in suffering party madness to fix a vile suspicion, where I know it ought not to rest ? I will never countenance so shameful a proceeding. Honour, justice, gratitude, private friendship, equally forbid it.
The majority of my brother members seem quite wild in their love. They would force a physician and surgeon upon me, when I have one of each already, and they forget that my dear friend and chaplain, Churchill, has left me for some time. Would it not therefore have looked better, if these obliging friends had shewn some regard to my spiritual concerns, and had ordered their own chaplain, the very learned brother of the very conscientious merchant, and of the very acute speaker, to attend me ; or they might perhaps have prevailed on good Mr. Kidgell. He is so ready to every laudable, and lucrative work, he would not, I believe, have hesitated. You might in time have had
Observations on my conversion and apostleship, though I hope not in a way to make you
doubt of the whole; at least you would have been sure of a series of letters in the Ledger, the profits to be divided between the said Kidgell and his partner Mac-Faden, according to Kidgell's former plan. I think the lords too, ought to have considered this important point of chaplain/hip, and lord Sandwich, or lord Le Despencer, or some other pious lord, should have moved to fend me a Divine Legation of the Bijhop of Gloucester. I have been said to have doubts. I really have none. If I had, that orthodox bishop would surely be able to remove them; only I should fear that for every one of mine he carried away, he would leave ten of his own behind with me. I might likewise be treated with one of his quaint persuasives to continence, the only doctrine to which his practice has been fully adequate. It could never come more a propos, nor with greater probability of success, for that cold frozen virtue of chastity, the virtue of age not of youth, seems likely to be as much my portion the rest of this year, as it has been that pedant's every year of his life.
 His virtue is fixed as in a frost, beyond all the powers of genial spring, or a charming, luscious wife: mine I trust will thaw, melt, and resolve itself to sprightly dew, long before the first breath of zephyr.
 After all, my dear doctor, I might I believe admit the state physician and surgeon without
any danger of a Russian hœmorrhoidal cholic, but I will not do any thing on compulsion,
Hal. I do not suspect either of them in the least to resemble a Talbot, a Martin, a Forbes,.
or a Dun. On the contrary, they are both amiable men, and therefore I wish you would
bring them here to dinner as soon as I get a little better, for at present if they came I
should fear they would place themselves by authority, one on the right, and the other on
the left hand, of their poor patient, and, like Sancho's doctor with his wand, forbid my
tasting any thing I ogled, or rather squinted at.
 I am alone. If you are disengaged, I wish you to come here at four, and I will give you half my boiled chicken. We never can want food for laughter, while, in the phrase of the sly Fox, George Grenville has the CONDUCT OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS.
 I am ever, my dear Sir,
Your affectionate humble servant, John Wilkes
I cannot express the concern I am under, from the impossibility I now find of attending my duty in parliament on the 19th of this month: I have suffered very much from
the tour I made here in the holidays to see my daughter : my wound is again become
extremely painful, the parts are very much inflamed, and a fever attends it. I inclose
a certificate of one of the King's physicians, and a surgeon of the army, gentlemen of eminence in their profession, who think it absolutely necessary for me to stay some time
longer at Paris. I refer to the certificate itself for the particulars.
 The impatience I feel to justify myself to the House, from the groundless and cruel
attacks upon me, and the zeal I hope ever to retain for the vindication of the sacred
rights of the Commons of Great Britain, and the privileges of parliament, both of which
have been grossly violated in my person, had determined me to set out for England
on Friday next; but I now find myself incapable of performing the journey. I am therefore, Sir, under the necessity of entreating you to submit my case to the House, and I
doubt not, from their justice, a more distant day will be appointed, when it may be in
my power to attend the discussion of points very important in themselves, and in which I am very materially concerned.
 I would not, Sir, implore this of the House, if I thought the delay could be attended with
any possible inconvenience to the public ; and I beg to observe, that I seized the first moment, which the resolutions of parliament gave me, to enter my appearance to the informations filed against me in the King's Bench.
 I am, With due respect and regard,
Sir, your most obedient humble servant, John Wilkes

I took the liberty of transmitting to you on the nth of last month the original of a certificate, which was entirely the hand-writing of Mr. Ninnin, one of the King's physicians, and signed by that gentleman, as well as by Mr. Dufouart, a surgeon of the army.
 It was not imagined here that any thing more was necessary among gentlemen. If the House, or any single member, had desired a notarial act of the authenticity of the certificate, I should sooner have troubled you with the enclosed, which is attested by our ambassador at this court. It now becomes my honour to request that it may be laid before the House. I do not mean, Sir, to mispend my time in making any remarks on the late proceedings. They are so obvious that they will immediately occur to every man, who is not lost to the principles of virtu? and dead to the feelings of honour and humanity. I am not able at present to say much, but this I will add, that I am sure my countrymen of the present age, and the faithful historian's page, will do justice to the uprightness of my
intentions, to my ardent love of the constitution of our happy island, and to the honest
efforts I have made in the cause of liberty. I rejoice that I have been the instrument in
the hand of Providence to obtain very important legal decisions in favour of my fellow
subjects.
I am, with becoming regard, Sir,
Your very humble servant, John Wilkes

The very honourable, unanimous, and repeated marks of esteem you conferred on me, by committing to my trust your liberty, safety, property, and all those glorious privileges which are your birth-right as Englishmen, entitle you to my warmest thanks, and to the
highest tribute of gratitude my heart can pay.
 Yet in the peculiar circumstances of my cafe, I think that I ought not at present to rest contented with thanking you. I have always found a true pleasure in submitting to you my parliamentary conduct. It is now more particularly my duty; and when I reflect on the real importance and interesting nature of those great events, in which, as your representative, I have been more immediately concerned, I am exceedingly anxious not barely to justify myself, but to obtain the sanction of your approbation. It has ever been my ambition to approve myself worthy of the choice you have more than once made of me as your deputy to the great council of the nation, with an unanimity equally honourable and endearing. The consciousness of having faithfully discharged my trust, of having acted an upright and steady part in Parliament, as well as in the most arduous circumstances, makes me dare to hope, that you will continue to me what I most value, the good opinion and friendship of my worthy constituents. Having the happiness of being born in a country, where the name of vassal is unknown, where Magna Charta is the inheritance of the subject, I have endeavoured to support and merit those privileges, to which my birth gave me the clearest right. Secure as I am of fully justifying my conduct, could I persuade myself that I have acted up to the sacred ideas of liberty, which warm the hearts, and inspire she actions of my countrymen, I should not, under all of the most unjust and cruel persecutions, be quite unhappy.
 The various charges brought against me may be reduced to two heads. The one is of a public, the other of a private nature. The first is grounded on the political paper of the North Briton, No. 45.; the other respects a small part of a ludicrous poem, which was stolen out of my house. The two accusations are only so far connected, that I am convinced there is not a man in England, who believes that if the first had not appeared, the second would ever have been called in question. The Majority in the House os Commons on the 15th of November 1763, Resolved, "That the Paper, intitled, The North Briton, No, 45, is a false, scandalous, and seditious Libel, containing expressions of the most unexampled insolence and contumely towards his Majesty, the grossest aspersions upon both Houses of Parliament, and the most audacious defiance of the authority of the
whole Legislature, and most manifestly tending to alienate the affections of the People from his Majesty, to withdraw them from their obedience to the laws of the realm, and
to excite them to traiterous insurrections against his Majesty's government." These are the words of the Resolution. I mean to examine them with some accuracy.
 The first charge is, that The North Briton, No. 45, is a false Libel, The Resolution was moved by Lord North; yet in a tedious speech he did not attempt to dispute the veracity of any one paragraph in the whole paper. I was in my place during that debate, and I took notice to the House, that his lordship had not said a word to prove the falsity of any one sentence ; but I could obtain no satisfaction, not even a reply, on that head.
'On my trial before lord Mansfield, the word false was omitted in the information, because I suppose the court of King's Bench knew that I would prove publicly on oath in that court, by the highest authorities, that every word in it was true. The word false is not to be found among the various epithets applied to this Paper, in either of the warrants issued by lord Halifax. I am bold to declare, upon the most careful perusal of this Paper, that there is not any one particular advanced, which is not founded on fact, and that every
line in it is strictly and scrupulously conformable to truth. I will not compliment the present profligate Majority in the House of Commons so far as to fay, they were so well
informed, that they knew the exact truth of every assertion in that Paper. One particular however came within their knowledge, the means by which it is hinted that the ENTIRE APPROBATION OF PARLIAMENT, even of the Preliminary Articles of the late
inglorious peace, was obtained, and the previous step to the obtaining that entire approbation, the large debt contracted on the Civil List. They knew this assertion was extremely true, and I am as ready to own that it was extremely scandalous.
 The second charge of scandalous must then be admitted in its full extent, still keeping
in our view that it is true. But to whom is it scandalous? To the Majority, who have
sacrificed the interests of the nation, by giving the entire approbation of Parliament, of which so much parade is made in the Speech, to an act, which ought to have been followed by an impeachment -- To the Minister, who made the late ignominious Peace, and in the very first year of it imposed on us an intolerable Excise. To the worst of vipers  in our bosom, to the Tories, who have never failed to support his unconstitutional measures, who have made us almost forget the infamy of their ancestors at Utrecht, by the greater sacrifices of the Peace of Paris.
 These are the objects of satire in a Paper, which deserved indeed the highest resentment of the Majority, because it had proclaimed their disgrace, their scandal through all Europe. It was very natural for these men no longer to suffer the supposed author to sit among them, and I should have gloried in my expulsion, if it had not dissolved a political connection with my friends at Aylesbury, which did me real honour.
 Another charge is, "That the Paper is a seditious libel, tending to withdraw the People from their obedience to the laws of the realm, and to excite them to traiterous insurrections against his Majesty's government." By the first warrant, under which I was apprehended, The North Briton, No. 45, was denominated a treasonable Paper. In
the second, by which I was committed to the Tower, that word too was omitted; so
that the greatest enemies of this paper seem to give up it's being either false or treasonable. Now the charge is varied by the Majority in the House of Commons, with all the little quibbling of attornies. The Paper is not treasonable, but it tends to excite traitorous insurrections. It is remarkable that the epithet traiterous is here given to insurrection, as the supposed consequence of a supposed libel whereas the Scots, who appeared in open rebellion so lately as 1745, were in the weekly writings against the North Briton, published under the patronage of the Scottish Minister, and paid for by him out of the public treasure, only termed insurgents, who defeated regular forces. Yet in fact no insurrection of any kind ever did, or could, follow from this publication, even in those parts of the kingdom so lately subjected to all the insolence and cruelty of the most despicable of our species, the mean, petty Exciseman. This is the strongest case which can possibly be put. The Excise is the most abhorred monster, which ever sprung from arbitrary power, and the new mode of it is spoken of through this Paper as the greatest grievance on the subject; yet even in this case, obedience to the laws, and all lawful authority is strictly enjoined, and no opposition, but what is consistent with the laws and the constitution, is allowed, The words are very temperate, cautious, and well guarded. "Every legal attempt of a contrary tendency to the spirit of concord will be deemed a justifiable resistance, warranted by the spirit of the English constitution." Is this withdrawing the people from their obedience to the laws of the realm? Is refinance
recommended, but expressly only so far as it is strictly legal? Let the impartial public
determine whether this is the language of SEDITION, or can have the least tendency to excite Traiterous insurrections, or whether the House of Commons have not made a false and groundless charge.
The general charge, that The North Briton, No. 45, is a libel, scarcely deserves an answer, because the term is vague, and still remains undefined by our law. Every man applies it to what he dislikes. A spirited satire will be deemed a libel by a wicked Minister, and by a corrupt judge, who feel, or who dread the lash. In my opinion the rankest libel of modern times is the false and fulsome Address of the Majority in this House of Commons on the Preliminary Articles. They said that they had considered them with their best attention, they expressed the Jlrongejl sentiments of gratitude, they gave their hearty applause, they declared the Peace would be no less honourable than profitable, solid, and, in all human probability, permanent. Were the House of Commons serious in this Address, which was drawn up and presented, even before any one of the gross blunders in the Preliminaries had been amended? If they were, the body of the people judged better, and did not hesitate to give their clear opinion, that the glories of the war were sacrificed by an inadequate and insecure Peace, which could not sail of soon retrieving the affairs of France. Time has already proved that the nation judged right, and that the Peace is in almost every part infamous >>and rotten, contrary to the vain boast in the  Minister's Speech at the  beginning of the same session. "The utmost care has been taken to remove all occasions of future disputes between my subjects and those of France and Spain, and thereby to add security and permanency to the blessings of Peace." A declaration not believed by the nation at the time it was made, and since, from a variety of facts, known not to be founded on truth. The North Briton did not suffer the public to be misled. He acknowledged no privileged vehicle of fallacy.
 He considered the liberty of the press as the bulwark of all our liberties, as instituted to open the eyes of the people, and he seems to have thought it the duty of a political writer to follow truth wherever it leads. In his behalf I would ask even Lord Mansfield, can truth be a libel ? Is it so in the King's Bench? Though it has always found a cold and unwelcome reception from his lordship, though it has through life proved much more his enemy than his friend, yet surely he has not been used to treat it as a libel. I do not know what the doctrine of the King's Bench now is, but I am sure that it will be a satisfactory answer to the honest part of mankind, who follow the dictates of found sense, not the jargon of law, nor the court flattery of venal Parliaments, that the North Briton, No. 45, cannot be a libel, because it does not in any one line deviate from truth.
This unlucky paper is likewise said to contain "expressions of the most unexampled
insolence and contumely towards his Majesty, most manifestly tending to alienate the
affections of the People from his Majesty;" and by the hirelings of the Ministry it is
always in private charged with personal disrespect to the King. It is however most certain that not a single word personally disrespectful to his Majesty is to be found in any
part of it. On the contrary, the Sovereign is mentioned not only in terms of decency, but with that regard and reverence, which is due from a good subject to a good King  --  "A
Prince of so many great and amiable qualities, whom England truly reveres - The
personal character of our present amiable Sovereign makes us easy and happy that so
great a power is lodged in such hands."
Are these the "expressions of the most an exampled insolence and contumely towards his Majesty," which the Majority in this House of Commons have declared that it contains? Are these "expressions most manifestly tending to alienate the affections of the People from his Majesty?" The Majority who could vote this, seem equally superior to any regard for truth, or modest fear of detection. The author of that Paper, so far from making any personal attack on his Sovereign, has even vindicated him personally from some of the late measures, which were so severely censured by the judicious and unbiased public. He exclaims, with an honest indignation, "what a shame was it to see the security of this country, in point of military force, complimented away, contrary TO THE OPINION OF ROYALTY ITSELF and sacrificed to the prejudices and to the ignorance of a set of people, the most unfit from every consideration to be consulted on a matter relative to the security of the House of Hanover?" When the speech is mentioned, when the various absurdities, and even fallacies of it, are held out to the nation, it is always called, in the language of Parliament and of the constitution, the Minister's speech; and the author declares, that he doubts, "whether the imposition is greater on the Sovereign or on the nation;" so tender has he been of the honour of his Prince, so zealous in his vindication. The Minister is indeed every where treated with the contempt and indignation he has merited, but he is ever carefully distinguished from the Sovereign. Every kingdom in the world has in it's turn found occasion to lament that princes of the best intentions have been deceived and misled by wicked and designing Ministers and Favourites. It has likewise in most countries been the fate of the few daring patriots, who have honestly endeavoured to undeceive their Sovereign, to feel the heaviest marks of his displeasure. It is however I think rather wonderful among us, even in these times, that a paper, which contains the most dutiful expressions of regard to his Majesty, should be treated with such unusual severity, and yet that so many other publications of the fame date, full of the most deadly venom, should pass totally unregarded. Some of these papers contained the most opprobrious reflections on that true patron of liberty, the late King, whose memory is embalmed with the tears of Englishmen, while his ashes are rudely trampled upon by others, whom his godlike attribute of mercy had pardoned the crime of unprovoked rebellion. Others were full of the most indecent abuse on our great Protestant ally, the King of Prussia, on the near relation of his present Majesty, who has merited so highly of the nation by fixing the crown in the House of Hanover, on the staunchest friends of freedom, the City of London, and on the first characters among us. Yet all these papers have pasted uncensured by Ministers, Secretaries, and by the two Houses of Parliament.
There only remains one other charge, that the North Briton, No. 45, "contains the
grossest aspersions upon both Houses of Parliament, and the most audacious defiance of
the authority of the whole Legiflature." It is to be lamented that the Majority of either
House of Parliament should ever lay the just ground of any aspersion, or fall into general
contempt with the people. We have seen their actions, "and we know the mercenary
motives of them. When the grossest aspersions are complained of, the question is, Have they been merited? Are they well founded? It is in vain they talk of their authority. It is departed from them. Authority, which is founded on esteem and reverence, and is the constant attendant only of those who are believed to be good and virtuous, has long ago left them ; but I must own their power still remains. We have seen to what unjustifiable lengths it has been carried; and a man who is rash enough to make an impotent and unavailing attack upon it, will soon find himself the unpitied victim. All thinking men are full of apprehensions at the approach of their meeting, and the nation impatiently expects the allotted term of resuming a power they have so shamefully abused, by setting aside those, who have made the noblest blood of our heroes be spilt almost in vain. Under the arbitrary Stuarts, when our more than Roman senates dared to bring truth to the foot of the throne, and made the trembling tyrant obey her sacred voice, the nation was in love with Parliaments, because they were the steady friends of liberty, and never met but in savour of the subject to redress the grievances of the people. Now we are alarmed at every approaching session, because we know that a corrupt Majority only assemble to make their own terms with the minister, to load their fellow-subjects with the most partial taxes, in order to pay the amazing number of useless places and pensions, created only to prevent their mutiny or desertion, or to surrender to the crown those privileges of Parliament, coeval with the constitution, which were at length acknowledged to be a just claim, and extorted from the usurpation of former prerogative princes for the safety of the people, and I fear they meet to forge fetters for themselves and their posterity.
 I have thus, gentlemen, gone through all the objections made against this paper, which is certainly innocent, perhaps meritorious, only to shew the extreme injustice of the treatment I experienced, as the supposed author. The most cruel orders were given by the deceased secretary of state, to drag me out of my bed at midnight. A good deal of humanity, and some share of timidity, prevented the execution of such ruffian-like commands. I was made a prisoner in my own house by several of the King's messengers,
who only produced a General Warrant, issued without oath, neither naming, nor describing me. I therefore refused to obey a warrant, which I knew to be illegal. I was however by violence carried before the Earls of Egremont and Halifax, who thought it worth their while to ask me a tolerable number of plain questions, to not one of which I thought it worth my while to give a plain answer. It is now no small satisfaction to me to know, that I have not a friend in the world, who wishes a single word unsaid by me in the critical moment of that examination. I informed their lordships of the orders actually given by the Court of Common Pleas for my Habeas Corpus; notwithstanding which I was committed to the Tower, the custody of me shifted into other hands, and that act for the liberty of the subject eluded. Although the offence of which I stood accused, was undoubtedly bailable, yet for three days every person was refused admittance to me, and the governor was obliged to treat me in a manner very different from the great humanity of his nature, for he had received orders to consider me as a close prisoner. I rejoice that I can say, I am the only instance of such rigorous treatment since the accession of the mild house of Brunswick, although the Tower has twice been crouded even with rebels from the northern parts of the Island ; and therefore I shall continue to regret the wretched and cowardly policy, the indecent partiality, and even injustice, of conferring on Scotsmen all the governments of the few conquests not tamely given up by the Scottish Minister, conquests won by the valour of the united forces of England, Scotland, and Ireland. While I suffered this harm confinement, my house in Great George-street was plundered, all my papers were seized, and some of a very  nice and delicate nature, not bearing the most distant relation to the asfairs of government, were divulged, as if Administration had been determined to shew, that men, who had violated public justice, were incapable of private honour.
 Two days previous to my being heard before a court of justice, I had the grief to find that my enemies had prevailed on his Majesty to shew me a publick mark of his displeasure, by superseding me as Colonel of the Regiment of my own county, without any complaint
against me, which could not but give such a step the very unconstitutional appearance of an endeavour to influence or intimidate my judges. When I was brought before the court of Common Pleas, I pleaded the cause of universal liberty. It was not the cause of Peers
and Gentlemen only, but of all the middling and inferior class of people, which stand most in need of protection, which I observed was on that day the great question before the court. I was discharged from imprisonment by the unanimous sentence of my judges, without giving any bail or security. On the first day of the meeting of Parliament, I humbly submitted my grievances to the House of Commons, as they were chosen to be the guardians of the liberties of the people against the despotism of ministers. I likewise voluntarily entered my appearance to the actions brought at law against me, as soon as I knew the determination of the Majority, that all the irregularities against me should be justified, and that no privilege should be allowed in my case, even as to the mode of proceeding, which was the most harsh the rancor of partycould devise.
The first charge exhibited against me was for being the author of the North Briton, No.
45, and I was expelled the House of Commons on that charge, after a loose examination at their bar of witnesses without oath. The judicial proceedings against me, as the sup-
posed author, were however dropped, and I was afterwards tried in the King's Bench only
for the republication of it. If the charge against me as author was just and could be supported on oath, why was I not tried at law on that charge? If the charge was unjust, and could not be supported on oath, why was I expelled? If the republication is a crime, it was publicly committed by the printers of several news-papers, who still remain unnoticed, although their names appear to their several papers. This is surely a glaring proof of the greatest partiality. My personal enemy, Lord Mansfield, chose to try both the causes against me, that he might, in the most dastardly manner, under the colour of law, avenge the attack made on those known political principles of his, so inconsistent with the glorious Revolution, on the rooted attachment of himself and his nearest relations to the Stuart family, on his partiality in the feat of justice,&c. &c. which seem to have been favourite topics in the North Briton, and other political papers, of which his Lordship did me the honour to name me as the author. This had long rankled in his heart, and now the fairest opportunity of revenge presented itself. Having carefully studied the records, and finding that they did not insure the certainty he wished of my conviction, on the evening preceding the trials, he sent for my solicitor to his own house, and desired him to consent to the alterations his Lordship proposed in both the causes, that of the North Briton, No. 45, and of the Essay on Woman.
The Chief Justice sunk into the crafty attorney, and made himself a party against the person accused before him as judge, when he ought to have presumed me innocent. My solicitor refused, and against his consent the records were there materially altered by his Lordship's express orders, so that I was tried on two new charges, very different from those I had answered. This is, I believe, the most daring violation of the rights of Englishmen, which has been committed by any judge since the time of Jeffries; yet this arbitrary Scottish Chief Justice, still remains unimpeached  --  except in the hearts of the whole nation. Several of the Jury were by counter-notices, signed Summoning Officer, prevented from attending on the day appointed for the trial, while others had not only private notice given them of the real day, but likewise instructions for their behaviour. To crown the whole, Lord Mansfield in his charge tortured both the law and the fact so grosly, that the audience were shocked no less at the indecency than at the partiality of his conduct. I was during all this time very dangerously ill with my daughter at Paris, absolutely incapable of making any personal defence, and indeed totally ignorant of the two new questions, on which I was to be tried.
  The Majority in the House of Commons had in this interval grown so impatient for
revenge, that they would not wait to see, if I should be intangled in the nice meshes of the curious Mansfield net, which was spread for me. They voted my expulsion, while I was confined to my bed at Paris, although I had sent to their Speaker the most authentic proof of my absolute inability to attend their summons, and had only desired a short delay.
 Humanity pleaded my cause in vain. The corrupt and cankered hearts of those men, which had been shut against justice, were not open to pity. They were steeled against compassion, but I am sure they will feel remorse.
   I now proceed to the o her charge brought against me, which respects an idle poem, called an Essay on Woman, and a few other detached verses. If so much had not been said on this subject, I should be superior to entering upon any justification of myself, because I will always maintain the right of private opinion in it's fullest extent, when it is not followed by giving any open, public offence to any establishment, or indeed to any individual. The crime commences from thence, and the magistrate has a right to interpose, and even to punish outrageous and indecent attacks on what any community has decreed to be sacred. Not only the rules of good breeding, but the laws of society are
then infringed. In my own closet I had a right to examine, and even to try by the keen edge of ridicule, any opinions I pleased. I have laughed pretty freely at the glaring absurdities of the most monstrous creed, which was ever attempted to be imposed on the credulity of Christians, a creed which our great Tillotson wished the Church of
England was fairly rid of, it was in private I laughed. I am not the first good Protestant, who has amused himself with the egregious nonsense, and silly conceits, of that
strange, perplexed, and perplexing mortal, that saint of more admirable swallow, and
more happy digestion than any of the tribe of Athanasms. I gave however no offence to
any one individual of the community. The fact is, that after the affair of the North Briton, the government bribed one of my servants to steal a part of the Essay on Woman,
and the other pieces, out of my house. Not quite a fourth part of the volume had been
printed at my own private press. The work had been discontinued for several months, be-
fore I had the least knowledge of the theft. Of that fourth part only twelve copies were
worked off, and I never gave one of those copies to any friend. In this infamous manner did government get possession of this new subject of accusation, and, except in
the case of Algernon Sydney, of this new species of crime; for a Stuart only could make
the refinement in tyranny of ransacking and robbing the recesses of closets and studies, in
order to convert private amusements into state crimes. After the servant had been bribed to commit the theft in his master's house, the  most abandoned  man of the age, who in this virtuous reign had risen to be secretary of state, was bribed to make a complaint to the House of Lords, that I had published an infamous Poem, which no man there had
' ever seen. It was read before that great assembly of grave lords and pious prelates, excellent judges of wit and poetry, and was ordered to lie on the table, for the clerks of the House to copy, and to publish through the nation. The whole of this proceeding was, I own, a public insult on order and decency; but it was committed by the House of Lords, not by the accused member of the House of Commons. The neat, prim, smirking chaplain of that babe of grace, that gude cheeld of the prudish kirk of Scotland, the earl of March, was highly offended at my having made an essay on woman. His nature could not forgive me that  ineffable crime, and his own conduct did not afford me the shadow of an apology. In great wrath he drew his grey goose quill against me. The pious peer caught the alarm, and they both poured forth most woful lamentations, their tender hearts over-
whelmed with grief, or as the chaplain, who held the pen, said, with grief of griefs. He
proceeded to make very unfair extracts, and afterwards to he-note them in the foulest manner. The most vile blasphemies were forged, and published as part of a work, which in reality contained nothing but fair ridicule on some doctrines I could not believe, mock
panegyrick, flowing from mere envy, which sickened at the superior parts and abilities, as
well as wondrous deeds of a man I could not love, a few portraits drawn from warm life,
with the too high colouring of a youthful fancy, and two or three descriptions, perhaps too luscious, which though nature and woman might pardon, a Kidgell and a Mans-
sield could not fail to condemn.
  I have now, Gentlemen, gone through all the objections, which have been made to my
conduct in a public capacity. My enemies finding that I was invulnerable, where they
pointed their most envenomed darts, afterwards attempted to assassinate my private character, and propagated an infinite variety of groundless calumnies against me. I have generally treated these with the contempt they deserved, from the certainty that all who knew me, would know that I was incapable of the things laid to my charge. A few falsehoods advanced with more boldness than the rest, I was at the pains to refute. The Winchester story in particular, because it respected lord Bute's own son, and had been ushered to the public with the greatest parade, as well as with all the impudence of malice, and rage of party, I disproved so fully, that I am sore not the least shadow of a doubt remained in any man's mind as to my entire innocence of that most illiberal charge. I have lived so long among you, Gentlemen, that I will rest every thing respecting me as a private man on the testimony, which the experience of so many years authorizes you to
give, well knowing that true candour always weighs in the fame balance faults and virtues. The shades in private life are darkened by an enemy, but scarcely seen by a friend. Besides it is not given to every man to be as pious as lord Sandwich, or as chaste, yet as potent, in and out of the marriage-bed, in all thought, word, and deed, as the Bishop of Gloucester.
  A few other particulars, Gentlemen, deserve to be mentioned, that you may have before you the whole of my conduct in these interesting affairs. Immediately after the late flagrant breach of the laws, I thought it my duty to the community to commence actions against all the persons guilty. I despised the meanness of attacking only agents and deputies. I endeavoured to bring to the jurisdiction of the law, the principals, the first and great offenders, the two secretaries of state. I blush for my country, when I add, that although I have employed the ablest gentlemen of the profession, they have hitherto found it  impossible even to force an appearance. Lord Egremont died, braving the justice of his country. Lord Halifax lives, perhaps to triumph over it, and to give the example to future secretaries of committing the grossest violation of the rights of the Commons with impunity. The judicial proceedings at my suit commenced in the beginning of May twelvemonth, and now at the end of October in the present year, his lordship has not entered any appearance, seeking shelter all the winter under privilege, all the summer under the c'.icane of law. The little offenders indeed have not escaped. Several honest juries have marked them with ignominy, and their guilt has been followed with legal punishment. But what is of infinitely greater importance to the nation, we have heard from the Bench, that general warrants are absolutely illegal. Such a declaration is become in the highest degree interesting to the subject, because the Majority in this courtly House of Commons refused the very last winter to come to any resolution in favour of the rights of their fellow-subjects. We owe it likewise to the most upright, independent, and intrepid Chief Juflice of the Court of Common Pleas, that in the action against the under secretary of state, Mr. Wood, the seizure of papers, except in cases of High Treason, has been declared illegal.
When I reflect on these two most important determinations in favour of liberty, the best cause, and the noblest stake, for which men can contend, I congratulate my free-born countrymen, and am full of gratitude that heaven inspired me with a firmness and fortitude equal to the conduct of so arduous a business. Under all the wanton cruelties of usurped and abused power, the goodness of the cause supported me, and I never lost sight of the great object, which I had from the first in my view, the preservation of the rights and privileges of every Englishman. I glory in the name, and will never forget the duties resulting from it. Though I am driven into exile from my dear country, I shall never cease to love and reverence it's constitution, while it remains free. It will continue my first ambition to approve myself a faithful son of England, and 1 shall always be ready to give my life a willing sacrifice to my native country, and to what it holds most dear, the security of our most invaluable liberties. While I live, I shall enjoy the satisfaction of thinking that I have not lived in vain, that the present age has borne the noblest testimony to me, and that my name will pass with honour to posterity, for the upright and disinterested part I have acted, and for my unwearied endeavours to protect and secure the persons, houses, and papers, of any fellow-subjects from arbitrary visits and seizures.
 I am, Gentlemen,
With much regard and affection, Your most obliged,
And obedient humble servant, JOHN WILKES

It is a very peculiar satisfaction I feel on my return to my native country, that a nobleman of your grace's superior talents, and inflexible integrity, is at the head of the most
important department of the state. I have been witness of the general applause, which has been given abroad to the choice his Majesty has made; and I am happy to find my own countrymen zealous and unanimous in every testimony of their approbation. I hope, my lord, that I may congratulate myself, as well as my country, on your grace's being placed in a station of so great power and importance. Though I have been cut off from the body of his Majesty's subjects, by a cruel and unjust proscription, I have never entertained an idea inconsistent with the duty of a good subject. My heart still retains all its former warmth for the dignity of England, and the glory of it's Sovereign. I have not associated with the traitors to our liberties, nor made a single connection with any man who was dangerous, or even suspected by the friends of the protestant family on the throne. I now hope that the rigour of a long, unmerited exile is past, and that I may may be allowed to continue in the land, and among the friends, of liberty.
   I wish, my lord, to owe this to the mercy of my Prince. I entreat your grace to lay me with all humility at the King's feet, with the truest assurances that I have never, in any moment of my life, swerved from the duty and allegiance I owe to my Sovereign, and that I implore, and in every thing submit to, his Majesty's clemency. Your grace's noble manner of thinking, and the obligations I have formerly received, which are still fresh in my mind, will, I hope, give a full propriety to this address, and I am sure, a heart glowing with the sacred zeal of liberty, must have a savourable reception from the Duke of Grafton. I flatter myself that my conduct will justify your grace's interceding with a Prince, who is distinguished by a compassionate tenderness and goodness to all his subjects.
 I am, with the truest respect,
My Lord, your Grace's most obedient
 And most humble servant, JOHN WILKES

I am not yet recovered from the astonishment into which I was thrown by your grace's
verbal message, in answer to my letter of the first of November. In a conversation I had with colonel Fitzroy at the Hotel d'Espagne, he did me the honour of assuring me, that I should find his brother my real and sincere friend, extremely desirous to concur in doing me justice, that he was to tell me this from your grace, but that many interesting particulars relative to me could not be communicated by letter, nor by the post. I fondly believed these obliging assurances, because on a variety of occasions your grace had testified a full approbation of my conduct, had thanked me in the most flattering terms, as the person the most useful to the common cause in which we were embarked, and had shewn an uncommon zeal to serve a man who had
suffered so much in the cause of liberty.
   I returned to England with the gayest, and the most lively hopes. As soon as I
arrived at London, I desired my excellent friend, Mr. Fitzherbert, to wait on your
grace with every profession of regard on my part, and the resolution I had taken of entirely submitting the mode of the application I should make to the throne for my pardon. I cannot express the anxiety, which your grace's answer gave me, "Mr. Wilkes must write to Lord Chatham." I then begged Mr. Fitzherbert to state the reasons, which
made it impossible for me to follow that advice, from every principle of honour, both
public and private. I shewed too the impropriety of supplicating a fellow-subject for
mercy, the prerogative good Kings are the most jealous of, by far the brightest jewel in
their crown, and the attribute by which they may the nearest approach to the Divinity.
I afterwards wrote the letter to your grace, which I have seen in all the public prints. I never received any other answer than a verbal message, "Mr. Wilkes must write to Lord Chatham. I do nothing without Lord Chatham." When I found that my pardon was to be bought with the sacrifice of my honour, I had the virtue not to hesitate. I spurned at the proposal, and left my dear native London, with a heart full of grief that my fairest hopes were blasted of humiliation that I had given an easy faith to the promises of a minister and a courtier, and of astonishment that a nobleman of parts and discernment could continue in an infatuation, from which the conduct of lord Chatham had recovered every other man in the nation. He was indeed long the favourite character of our countrymen. Every tongue was wanton in his praise. The whole people lavished on him their choicest favours, and endeavoured by the noblest means, by an unbounded generosity and confidence, to have kept him virtuous. With what anguish were we at last undeceived? How much it cost us to give up a man, who had so long entirely kept possession of our hearts? How cruel was the struggle? But alas! how is he changed? how fallen? from what height fallen? His glorious sun is set, I believe never to rise again.
   We long hoped, my lord, that public virtue was the guide of his actions, and the love of our country his ruling passion, but he has fully shewn, omnis vis, virtusque in
lingua sua est. Our hearts glowed with gratitude for the important services he had done against the common enemy, and the voice of the nation hailed him our deliverer; but private ambition was all the while skulking behind the shield of the patriot, and at
length in an evil hour made him quit the scene of all his glory, the only place in which
he could be truly useful, for a retreat, where he knew it was impossible the confidence of
the people could follow, but where he might in inglorious ease bear his blushing honours thick upon him.
  I might now, my lord, expostulate with your grace on a verbal message, and of such a nature, in answer to a letter couched in the most decent and respectful terms, coming too from a late member of the legislature. I might regret, that the largest proffers of friendship and real service could mean no more than two or three words of cold advice, that I should apply to another. I might be tempted to think it a duty of office in the first lord of the Treasury, to have submitted to his Majesty a petition relative to the exercise of the noblest act of regal power, which any constitution can give any sovereign. Surely, my lord, my application to the first commission of the treasury, who is always, considered as the first minister, in England, was the very proper application. As I had made no discovery of any new wonderful pill or drop, nor pretended to the secret of curing the gout or the tooth-ach, I never thought of soliciting lord Chatham for a privy seal. His lordship's office was neither important, nor responsible. I will not however enlarge on this, but I shall desire your grace's permission fully to state what has happened to me as a private gentleman, relative to lord Chatham, because I would not leave a doubt concerning the propriety of my conduct in a mind naturally so candid, and so capable of judging truly, as that of the Duke of Grafton.
   I believe that the flinty heart of lord Chatham has known the sweets of private friendship, and the fine feelings of humanity, as little as even lord Mansfield. They are both formed to be admired, not beloved. A proud, insolent, overbearing, ambitious man is always full of the ideas of his own importance, and vainly imagines himself superior to the equality necessary among real friends in all the moments of true enjoyment. Friendship is too pure a pleasure for a mind cankered with ambition, or the lust of power and grandeur. Lord Chatham declared in Parliament the strongest attachment to lord Temple, one of the greatest characters our country could ever boast, and said, he would live and die with his noble brother. He has received obligations of the first magnitude from that noble brother, yet what trace of gratitude, or of friendship was ever found in any part of his conduct? and has he not now declared the most open variance, and even hostility? I have had as warm and express declarations of regard as could be made by this marble-hearted friend, and Mr. Pitt had no doubt his views in even feeding me with  flattery from time to time, on occasions too where candour and indulgence were all I could claim. He may remember the compliments he paid me on two certain poems in the year 1754. If I were to take the declarations made by himself and the late Mr. Potter a la lettre, they were more charmed with those verses after the ninety-ninth reading than after the first; so that from this circumstance, as well as some of his speeches in Parliament, it seems to be likewise true of the first orator, or rather the first comedian, of our age, non displicussfi Mi jocos, sed non conttgiffe.
   I will now submit to your grace, if there was not something peculiarly base and perfidious in Mr. Pitt's calling me a blasphemer of my God for those very verses, at a time when I was absent, and dangerously ill from an affair of honour. The charge too he knew was is false, for the whole ridicule of those two pieces was confined to certain mysteries, which formerly the unplaced and unpensioned Mr. Pitt did not think himself obliged even to affect to believe. He added another charge equally unjust, that I was the libeller of my King, although he was sensible that I never wrote a single line disrespectful to the sacred person of my Sovereign, but had only attacked the despotism of his ministers, with the spirit becoming a good subject and zealous friend of his country. The reason of this perfidy was plain. He was then beginning to pay homage to the Scottish idol, and I was the most acceptable sacrifice he could offer at the shrine of Bute. History scarcely gives so remarkable a change. He was a few years ago the mad, seditious Tribune of the People, insulting his Sovereign even in his capital city, now he is the abject, crouching deputy of the proud Scot, who, as he declared in Parliament, wants wisdom, and holds principles incompatible with freedom; a most ridiculous character surely for a statesman, and the subject of a free kingdom, but the very proper composition for a favourite. Was it possible for me after this to write a suppliant letter to lord Chatham? I am the first to pronounce myself most unworthy of a pardon, if I could
have obtained it on those terms.
   Although I declare, my lord, that the conscious pride of virtue makes me look down
with contempt on a man, who could be guilty of this baseness, who could in the lobby declare that I must be supported, and in the House on the same day desert and revile me, yet I will on every occasion do justice to the minister. He has served the public in all those points, where the good of the nation coincided with his own private views; and in no other. I venerate the memory of the Secretary, and I think it an honour to myself that I steadily supported in Parliament an administration the most successful we ever had, and which carried the glory of the nation to the highest pitch in every part of the world. He found his country almost in despair. He raised the noble spirit of England, and strained every nerve against our enemies. His plans, when in power, were always great, although in direct opposition to the declarations of his whole life, when out of power. The invincible bravery of the British troops gave success even to the most rash, the most extravagant, the most desperate of his projects. He saw early the hostile intentions of Spain, and if the celebrated written advice, which he gave, had been followed, a very few weeks had then probably closed the last general war; although the merit of that advice was more the merit of his noble brother, than his own. After the omnipotence of lord Bute in 1761 had forced Mr. Pitt to retire from his Majesty's councils, and the cause was declared by himself to be our conduct relative to Spain, I had the happiness of setting that affair in so clear and advantageous a light, that he expressed the most entire satisfaction, and particular obligations to my friendship. I do not however make this a claim of merit to Mr. Pitt. It was my duty, from the peculiar advantages of information I then had. The constitution of our country has no obligations to him. He has left it with all it's beauties, and all it's blemishes. He never once appeared in earnest about any question of liberty. He was the cause that in 1764 no point was gained for the public in the two great questions of General Warrants, and the Seizure of Papers. The cursed remains of the court of Star Chamber, the enormous power of the attorney-general, the sole great judicial officer of the crown, who is durante bene placito, and not upon oath, who tramples on Grand Juries, and breaks down the first, the foremost barriers of liberty, continued during his administration the same as before. Every grievance, which was not rooted out by the glorious Revolution, and the later struggles of our patriots, still subsists in full force, notwithstanding the absolute power he exercised for several years over every department of the state  - But I have done with lord Chatham. I leave him to the poor consolation of a place, a pension, and a peerage, for which he has fold the confidence of a great nation. Pity shall find, and weep over him. 
I am now, my lord, once more driven from the Romans to the gay, the polite Athenians, but I shall endeavour to convince your grace that I am not totally lost to my country, nor to myself, in this scene of elegant dissipation, and that I do not waste the time in unavailing complaints of my hard fate, and the ingratitude of those, whom I have served with success; for I shall very soon beg to call the public attention to some points of national importance, and in the mean time I shall embrace this opportunity of doing myself justice against the calumnies, which a restless faction does not cease to propagate.
The affair of the General Warrant, and the Habeas Corpus, is told very unfaithfully, and almost every particular relative to my being made a prisoner, and sent to the Tower on
the 30th of April 1763, has been injuriously misrepresented in several late publications. I
shall therefore state the transactions of that memorable day, and I appeal to the minutes
taken at the time for the accuracy of this relation.
   On my return from the city early that morning, I met at the end of Great George-
street one of the Kind's messengers. He told me that he had a warrant to apprehend me,
which he must execute immediately, and I must attend him to lord Halifax's. I desired
to see the warrant. He said it was against the authors, printers, and publishers of the North
Briton, No. 45, and that his verbal orders were to arrest Mr. Wilkes. I told him the
warrant did not respect me. I advised him to be very civil, and to use no violence in the
street, for if he attempted force, I would put him to death in the instant, but if he would
come quietly to my house, I would convince him of the illegality of the warrant, and the
injustice of the orders he had received. He chose to accompany me home, and then produced the General Warrant. I declared that such a warrant Was absolutely illegal and void in itself, that it was a ridiculous warrant against the whole English nation, and I asked why he should serve it on me rather than on the Lord Chancellor, either of the secretaries of state, lord Bute, or lord Corke, my next door neighbour. The answer was, I am to arrest Mr. Wilkes. About an hour afterwards two other messengers arrived, and several of their assistants. They all endeavoured in vain to persuade me to accompany them to lord Halifax's. I had likewise many civil messages from his lordship to desire my attendance.My only answer was, that I had not the honour of visiting his lordship, and this first application was rather rude and ungentleman-like.
   While some of the messengers and their assistants were with me, Mr. Churchill came
into the room. I had heard that their verbal orders were likewise to apprehend him, but I suspected they did not know his person, and by presence of mind I had the happiness of saving my friend. As soon as Mr. Churchill entered the room, I accosted him, "Good morrow, Mr. Thomson. How does Mrs. Thomson do to-day? Does she dine in
the country?" Mr. Churchill thanked me, said she then waited for him, that he only
came for a moment to ask me how I did, and almost directly took his leave. He went home immediately, secured all his papers, and retired into the country. The messengers could never get intelligence where he was. The following week he came to town, and was
present both the days of hearing at the court of Common Pleas.
   The whole morning pasted in messages between lord Halifax and me. The business of the messengers being soon publicly known, several of  my friends came to me on so extraordinary an event. I desired two or three of them to go to the court of Common Pleas, to make affidavit of my being a prisoner in my own house under an illegal warrant, and to demand the Habeas Corpus. The Chief Justice gave orders that it should issue immediately.  A constable came afterwards with several assistants of the messengers. I repeatedly insisted on their all leaving me, and declared I would not suffer any one of them to continue in the room against my consent, for I knew and would support the rights of an Englishman in the sanctuary of his own house.
    I was then threatened with immediate violence, and a regiment of the guards, if necessary. I soon found all resistance would be vain. The constable demanded my sword, and insisted on my immediately attending the messengers to lord Halifax's. I replied, that if they were not assassins, they should first give me their names in writing. They complied with this, and thirteen set their hands to the paper. I then got into my own chair, and proceeded to lord Halifax's, guarded by the messengers and their assistants. I was conducted into a great apartment fronting the Park, where lord Halifax and lord Egremont, the two secretaries of state, were sitting at a table covered with paper, pens, and ink. The under secretaries stood near their lordships. Mr, Lovel Stanhope, the law-clerk, and Mr. Philip Carteret Webb, the solicitor of the treasury, were the only persons besides who attended. Lord Egremont received me with a supercilious, insolent air; lord Halifax with great politeness. I was desired to take the chair near their lordships, which I did. Lord Halifax then began, "that he was really concerned that he had been necessitated to proceed in that manner against me, that it was exceedingly to be regretted, that a gentleman of my rank and abilities could engage against the King, and his Majesty's government." I replied, " that his lordship could not be more mistaken, for the King had not a subject more zealously attached to his person and government than myself, that I had all my life been a warm friend of the House of Brunswick and the Protestant succession, that while I made the truest professions of duty to the King, I was equally free to declare in the fame moment, that I believed no Prince had ever the misfortune of being served by such ignorant, insolent, and despotic ministers, of which my being there was a fresh, glaring proof, for I was brought before their lordships by force under a General Warrant, which named no body, in violation of the laws of my country, try, and of the privileges of Parliament, that I begged both their lordships to remember my present declaration, that on the very first day of the ensuing session of Parliament, I would stand up in my place and impeach them, for the outrage they had committed in my person against the liberties of the people." Lord Halisax answered, "that nothing had been done, but by the advice of the best lawyers, and that it was now his duty to examine me." He had in his hand a long list of questions, regularly numbered. He began, "Mr. Wilkes, do you know Mr. Kearsly? When did you see him? &c. &c." I replied, "that I suspected there was a vain hope my answer would tend rather to what his lordship wished to know, that he seemed to be lost in a dark and intricate path, and really wanted much light to guide him through it, but that I could assure his lordship not a single ray should come from me." Lord Halifax returned to the charge, "Mr. Wilkes, do you know Mr. Kearsly? &c. &c." I said, "That this was a curiosity on his lordship's part, which however laudable in the secretary, I did not find myself disposed to gratify, and that at the end of my examination all the quires of paper on their lordships table should be as milk white as at the beginning." Lord Halifax then "desired to remind me of my being their prisoner, and of their right to examine me." I answered, "that I should imagine their lordships' time
was too precious to be trifled away in that manner, that they might have seen before
I would never say one word they desired to know;" and I added, "Indeed, my lords,
I am not made of such flight, flimsy stuff; then turning to lord Egremont, I said,"Could
you employ tortures, I would never utter a word unbecoming my honour, or affecting
the sacred confidence of any friend. God has given me firmness and fidelity. You
trifle away your time most egregiously, my lords." Lord Halifax then "advised me to weigh well the consequences of my conduct, and the advantages to myself of a generous, frank confession." I lamented "the prostitution of the word, generous, to what I should consider as an act of the utmost treachery, cowardice, and wickedness." His
lordship then asked me, "If I chose to be a prisoner in my own house, at the Tower,
or in Newgate, for he was disposed to oblige me." I gave his lordship my thanks,
but "I desired to remark, that I never received an obligation, but from a friend, that
I demanded justice, and my immediate liberty, as an Englishman, who had not offended
the laws of his country; that as to the rest, it was beneath my attention, the odious idea of restraint was the same odious idea every where; that I would go where I pleased, and if I was restrained by a superior force, I must yield to the violence, but would never give colour to it by a shameful compromise; that every thing was indifferent to me in comparison of my honour and my liberty: that I made my appeal to the laws, and had already by my friends applied to the Court of Common Pleas for the Habeas Corpus, which the Chief Justice had actually ordered to be issued, and that I hoped to owe my discharge solely to my innocence, and to the vigour of the law in a free country." Lord Halisax then told me, "that I should be sent to the Tower, where I should be treated in a manner suitable to my rank, and that he hoped the Messengers had behaved well to me." I acknowledged "that they had behaved with humanity, and even civility to me, notwithstanding the ruffian orders given them by his lordship's colleague." I then again turned to lord Egremont, and said, "Your lordship's verbal orders were to drag me out of my bed at midnight. The first man, who had entered my bed-chamber by force, I should have laid dead on the spot. Probably I should have fallen in the skirmish with the others. I thank God, not your lordship, that such a scene of blood has been avoided. Your lordship is very ready to issue orders, which you have neither the courage to sign, nor I believe to justify." No reply was made to this. The conversation dropped. Lord Halisax retired into another apartment. Lord Egremont continued sullen and silent about a quarter of an hour. I then made a few remarks on some capital pictures, which were in the room, and his lordship left me alone.
   I was afterwards conducted into another apartment. I found there several of my friends, in argument with the most infamous of all the tools of that administration, Mr. Philip Carteret Webb. He confirmed to me, that I was to be carried to the Tower, and "wished to know if I had any favours to ask. "I replied, " that I was used to confer, not to receive, favours, that I was superior to the receiving any, even from his masters, that all I would say to him was, if my valet de chambre was allowed to attend me in the Tower, I should be shaved and have a clean shirt; if he was not, I should have a long beard, and dirty linen." Mr. Webb said, that orders would be given for his admission at the Tower." I complained of the shameful evasion of the Habeas Corpus, in sending me to the Tower, though the orders of the Chief justice Pratt were known. Mr. Webb made no reply to this. He came to visit me at the Tower in the beginning of my imprisonment, when I had not the permission to see any friend. I desired him almost at his first entrance to take his leave; "for if I was not allowed to f see those I loved, I would not see those I despised."
   While I continued in the Tower, I was pressed to offer bail in order to regain my liberty, and two of the first nobility desired to be my securities in the sum of 100,000 each. I was exceedingly grateful for the offer, but would not accept it. I observed, that neither my health, nor my spirits, were affected, that I would by great temperance and abstinence endeavour to compensate the want of air and exercise, but if my health suffered in a dangerous way, I would then accept such generous offers, for I hoped to live that so noble a cause might be brought to a glorious issue for the liberties of my country. From the beginning of this arduous business, I would not on any occasion give bail, by which I never involved any friend, and remained the perfect master of my own
conduct.
   I shall now, my lord, proceed to do myself justice against a calumny of Sir John
Cust, a person of the meanest natural parts, and infinitely beneath all regard, except from the office he bears, with the utmost discredit to himself, with equal disgrace and insufficiency to the public. I find in the twenty-ninth volume of the Journals of the House
of Commons, just published, page 721. " Jovis 190 die Januarii, 1764, Mr. Speaker acquainted the House, that he, upon Tuesday last, received a letter by the general post
from Mr. Willces, dated Paris the 11th instant, inclosing a paper in the French language, purporting to be a certificate of one of the French King's physicians, and of a surgeon of the said King's army, relating to the state of Mr. Wilkes's health, subscribed with two names, but not authenticated before a notary public, nor the signature thereof verified in any manner whatsoever." Then follow the letter and certificate. The insinuation is too plain to be overlooked, too false to be forgiven. The signature was verified by my letter. It is certain that the certificate was in all the usual forms, yet though the affair was determined with respect to me, and I was indecently expelled the House of Commons on
the fame day, without any time being allowed for other proof, a regard to truth, and my
own honour, made me give the most compleat answer to this wretched subterfuge of the
abandoned Majority. I sent a second certificate in the unusual form they had prescribed
themselves, attested by two notaries, and confirmed by the English ambassador. I wrote likewise again to the Speaker on the 5th of February following, but neither the second letter, certificate, or attestation, is to be found in the Journals, as they ought in justice to my character. I have, however, my lord, taken care that they should be published, for in a free government like our's, I will endeavour through my life to emulate the spirit of antient Rome, provoco ad populum; and while the people do not condemn me, I may perhaps in this, I Jhall most certainly in every succeeding age, rise superior to any party cabal, or court faction. This step covered my enemies with confusion, but was of no farther service to me. The party war against me ceased of course in the House of Commons, but flamed with equal fury in Westminster Hall, and was attended with every circumstance of revenge and cruelty, which the ingenious wit of a Mansfield could devise to gratify the malice of a bad heart.
   In the same volume of the Journals, page 723, I find that I am voted guilty of writing and publishing thepaper intituled, " The North Briton, No. 45," and that several' witnesses were examined as to those two facts. There is not however in the Journals a single word of the evidence they gave, and it is well known that not one of them did, or could, say any thing relative to the authorship. The evidence of the publication was exceedingly slight, but the willingness of the judges made ample amends for the deficiency of the witnesses, who were not upon oath. The administration did not chuse to risk either of these charges against me even in the court of King's Bench, and I was only tried for a re-publication. I will never blush at the imputation of being the author of that paper, because I know that truth is respected in every line. One circumstance will soon fully appear to the indignant public. I mean the large debt on the Civil List, contracted chiefly by the scandalous purchase of a parliamentary approbation of the late ignominious peace, the arbitrary Excise, and other ruinous measures of the Scottish minister. But I leave the affair of the Civil List to a future exact discussion.
   The last calumny, my lord, which I shall disprove, respects the actions at law against lord Halifax. It is said that I have neglected, or purposely discontinued them, since my exile. The imputation is totally groundless. I was so ill at Paris in the beginning of the year 1764, that it was impossible for me then to return to England alive, but I gave the most express orders that the law proceedings should be carried on with vigour, and in fact there was not a moment's delay. When my wound began to heal in the spring, I was dissuaded by all my friends from returning to a country, where the fame administration, which had illegally seized my person, plundered my house, corrupted the fidelity of my servants, and by the wicked arts of an arbitrary judge, who caused the records to be falsified, had just obtained two verdicts against me, were still in full power. I yielded to these reasons, because propter eorum scelus, n 'thil mihi intra meos parietes tutum, nihil insidiis, vacuum viderem. Lord Halifax for near two years availed himself of every advantage, which privilege and the chicane of law could furnish. He never entered any appearance to a court of justice, and the Common Pleas had, as far as they could, punished such an open contempt, such a daring proof that administration would not submit to the law of the land, and had endeavoured to compel his lordship to appear. Towards the end of 1764 I was outlawed.  The proceedings continued against his lordship till that hour. He then appeared, and his single plea was, that as an outlaw, I could not hold any action. No other defence was made against the heinous charge of having in my person violated the rights of the people.
   I felt this, my lord, as the most cruel stroke, which fortune had given me. Justice had at length overtaken many of the inferior criminals, but my outlawry prevented my punishing the great, the capital offender, when after all his subterfuges he was almost within my reach. I please myself however with the reflexion, that no minister has since dared to issue a General Warrants nor to sign an order for the Seizure of Papers. In the one the personal liberty of every subject is immediately concerned. On the other may depend not only his own safety and property, but what will come still more home to a man of honour, the security, the happiness of those, with whom he is most intimately connected, their fortunes, their future views, perhaps secrets, the discovery of which would drive the coldest stoic to despair, their very existence possibly, all that is important in the public walk of life, all that is dear and sacred in friendship and in love. I was the last oppressed, but I was the first man, who had the courage to carry through a just resistance to these acts of despotism. The opinions of our sovereign courts of justice are now known and established. I rejoice that several others, who suffered before me, have made their appeal to the laws, and obtained redress. I hope the iron rod of ministerial oppression is at length broken, and that I am the last victim of violence and cruelty. I shall not then regret all the sacrifices I have made, and my mind shall feast itself with the recollection in the unjust exile I am doomed to suffer from my friends and my native land.
   I will now, my lord, only add, however unfashionable such a declaration may be, that consistency shall never depart from my character, that to the last moment I will preserve the same fixed and unconquerable hatred to the enemies of our happy island, the same warm attachment to the friends and the cause of liberty, that I keep a steady and a
longing eye on England, that my endeavours for the good and service of my country by every method left me, shall have a period only with my life, and that although I do not mean to lay any future claim to your grace's favour, I will take care to secure your esteem.
I am, my lord, Your grace's most obedient,
and very humble servant,
JOHN WILKES
Most gratefully sensible of those generous and patriotic principles which have induced you to elect me your representative in parliament, I intreat you to accept of my best endeavours to express the joy which inspires me on so interesting, so affecting an occasion. The personal regard you have shewn me, indeed, confers on me an obligation, the due sense of which I too cordially feel to find words to describe. I cannot, however, forbear congratulating you, as the most distinguished of Englishmen, on the honourable
proof you have given, that the genuine spirit of independency, the true love of our country (for which the-county of Middlesex has, for ages, been so eminently conspicuous) still glow in your breasts with unremitting ardour, still shine forth with undiminished lustre. Let them call their pusillanimity prudence, while they ignominiously kiss the rod of power, and tamely stoop to the yoke, which artful ministers insidiously prepare, and arbitrarily impose. You, Gentlemen, have shewn, that you are neither to be deceived nor enslaved.
   In proving yourselves enemies to ministerial persecution, the eyes of the whole kingdom, of the whole world, are upon you, as the first and firmest defenders of public liberty. Happy shall I think myself, if, fired by your example, the efforts of my warmest zeal may be deemed an adequate return for the favours you have bestowed on me; but however inefficient my abilities, my will to serve you is unbounded as it is unalterable. Engaged as I have long been in the glorious cause of freedom, I beg you to consider my past conduct as an earnest of the future, and to look on me as a man, whose primary views will ever regard the rights and privileges of his fellow countrymen in general, and whose secondary views shall be attentively fixed on the dignity, advantage, and prosperity of the county of Middlesex. Let me therefore desire of you gentlemen, to favour me from time to time, with such instructions as may best enable me to accomplish those ends; resting assured of always finding me devoted to your service, and that the happiest moments of  my life will be those in which I am employed in maintaining the civil and religious rights of Englishmen, and in promoting the interests of my constituents.
 I am, with the truest respect,
Gentlemen, your obliged,
and faithful humble servant,
JOHN WILKES

My Lords,
   According to the voluntary promise I made to the public, I now appear before this sovereign court of justice, to submit myself in every thing to the laws of my country. Two verdicts have been found against me. One is for the re-publication of the North Briton, No. 45, the other for the publication of a ludicrous poem. As to the re-publication of that number of the North Briton, I cannot yet fee that there is the smallest degree of guilt. I have often read and examined with care that famous paper, I know that it is in every part founded on the strongest evidence of facts. I find it full of duty and respect to the person of the King, although it arraigns, in the severest manner, the conduct of his Majesty's then ministers, and brings very heavy charges home to them. I am persuaded they were well grounded, because every one of those ministers has since been removed. No one instance of falsehood has yet been pointed out in that pretended libel, nor was the word false in the information before this court. I am therefore perfectly easy under every imputation respecting a paper, in which truth has guided the pen of the writer, whoever he was, in every single line, and it is this circumstance which has drawn on me, as the supposed author, all the cruelties of ministerial vengeance. As to the other charge against me for the publication of a poem, which has given just offence, I will assert, that such an idea never entered my mind. I blush again at the recollection that it has been at any time, and in any way, brought to the public eye, and drawn from the obscurity in which it remained under my roof. Twelve copies of a small part of it had been printed in my house at my own private press. 1 had carefully locked them up, and I never gave one to the most intimate friend. Government, after the affair of the North Briton, bribed one of my servants to rob me of the copy, which was produced in the House of Peers, an afterwards afterwards before this honourable court. The nation was justly offended, but not with me, for it was evident that I had not been guilty of the least offence to the public. I pray God to forgive, as I do, the jury, who have found me guilty of publishing a poem I concealed with care, and which is not even yet published, if any precise meaning can be affixed to any word in our language. But, my lords, neither of the two verdicts could have been found against me, if the records had not been materially altered without my consent, and, as I am informed, contrary to law. On the evening only before the two trials, lord chief justice Mansfield caused the records to be altered at his own house, against the consent of my solicitor, and without my knowledge ; for a dangerous illness, arising from an affair of honour, detained me at that time abroad. The alterations were of the utmost importance, and I was in consequence tried the very next day on two new charges, of which I could know nothing. I will venture to declare this proceeding unconstitutional. I am advised that it is illegal, and that it renders both the verdicts absolutely void. I have stood forth, my lords, in support of the laws against the arbitrary acts of ministers. This court of justice, in a solemn appeal respecting General Warrants, shewed their sense of my conduct. I shall continue to reverence the wise and mild system of English laws, and this excellent constitution, I have been much misrepresented; but under every species of persecution, I will remain firm and friendly to the monarchy, dutiful and affectionate to the illustrious Prince who wears the crown, and to the whole Brunswick line. As to all nice, intricate points of law, I am sensible how narrow and circumscribed my ideas are but I have experienced the deep knowledge, and great abilities of my counsel. With them I rest the legal part of my defence, submitting every point to the judgment of this honourable court, and to the laws of England.

Gentlemen,
After every kind of opposition from the tools of ministerial power, and every hour of delay, which could be gained by the chicane of law, I find myself at last happy, even under this day's severe sentence, that by the unanimous determination, of all the judges of the court of King's Bench I am restored to my birth-right, to the noble liberties and privileges of an Englishman. The outlawry, which is now reversed, has appeared clearly
to be an act of equal injustice and cruelty, from the very beginning erroneous and illegal. In the whole progress of ministerial vengeance against me for several years, I have shewn, to the conviction of all mankind, that my enemies have trampled on the laws, and been actuated by the spirit of tyranny and arbitrary power, The general warrant, under which I was first apprehended, has been adjudged illegal. The seizure of my papers was condemned judicially. The outlawry, so long the topic of virulent abuse, is at last declared to have been contrary to law; and on the ground sirst taken by my learned counsel, Mr. Serjeant Glynn, is formally reversed. It still remains in this public cause, that the justice of the nation should have place against the first and great criminal, the late secretary of state, lord Halifax, not so much for the punishment he has merited, as for the example of terror to any present or future minister, who might otherwise be tempted to invade the sacred liberties of our country. I pledge my self to you, that my strongest efforts shall be exerted to carry this through with a spirit and firmness becoming an affair of national consequence, yet without the smallest degree of private rancour or malice, which neither my long and hard imprisonment, nor the past provocations, shall make me harbour against any man.
   At the end of this tedious and harsh confinement, I hope, gentlemen, to pass the rest of my life a freeman among you, my freeborn Countrymen ; and, give me leave to declare, that on every emergency, whenever the rights of the people are attacked, I shall be ready to stand forward, and to risk all for what is nearest to my heart, the freedom of England. In this glorious cause we are equally engaged. We have only one common interest, that of our country, its laws, and liberties, and in consequence, the preservation of our Sovereign, and the Brunswick line. These objects we will readily pursue, and freedom shall not perish among us, neither by the treachery and corruption of ministers, nor by the fate of arms, while we remain men and Englishmen. I observe, gentlemen, in the speech of the lords commissioners at the opening of this parliament, that no matters of general business are to come on this session, before the winter, I beg to be honoured with your commands for the next session on any points of importance, which you may judge proper to be submitted to the great council of the nation, either respecting the kingdom in general, or our county in particular. In all our common concerns I entreat for myself your candour and indulgence, of which I feel that I stand in great need. My views, however,
will be approved by you, for they shall be public spirited, and in no instance selfish or
partial. I would not for a moment lie under the suspicion of a mean, private, interested
plan of conduct or personal ambition. I am determined to remain entirely independent, uncorrupted, even unbiassed in an improper manner, and never to accept from the crown, either place, pension, gratuity or emolument of any kind. I will live and die in your service, a private gentleman, perfectly free, under no controul but the laws, under no influence but yours, and I hope by your favour and kindness, one of the representatives of parliament for the county of Middlesex. On these terms only I expect through life the continuance of your support, as well as the favourable opinion of you, and all other good men, the friends of liberty and of my country.
 I am, Gentlemen,
With gratitude and esteem,
Your faithful and obedient
Humble servant,
King's Bench prison,
Saturday, June 18, 1768
JOHN WILKES

Gentlemen,
I cannot suppress the emotions of a grateful heart. I must pay you my best tribute of thanks for the many proofs of a noble and generous friendship, which you have continued to me in this prison now for above six months. I will not lament my past sufferings, nor even a harsh and cruel sentence, because that I find your favour and protection, are extended to me in proportion to the encrease of the persecutions I undergo. Every day gives a fresh mark of your kindness and affection ; I trust that I may add likewise, of
my firmness in the cause, as well as steady attachment of my friends, the supporters of
freedom, and the constitution of our native country.
   The parliament being summoned to meet the next week for the dispatch of business,
I think it my duty to submit to you the particulars of my future conduct. I mean, to
petition the House of Commons, as the grand inquest of the nation, in the full hope of a
redress of all my grievances, which have arisen from various acts of arbitrary power exerted by the ministers, the illegalities respecting the two trials, and especially the alteration of the records. I have already lodged an appeal against the two sentences before the House of Lords, as the supreme judicature of this kingdom, and I shall bring before their Lordships the whole state of the legal proceedings, which I believe are no less erroneous and invalid than those have already been declared to be, which respected the outlawry. The meeting of parliament will suspend the important public cause against Lord Halifax, which cannot be tried till the term following the next prorogation.
  I look forward, gentlemen, to the happy moment of regaining my freedom, and of
giving you in a British senate the clearest demonstration that the principles of Liberty have taken a deep root in my heart. You shall find me a faithful guardian of the civil and religious liberties of the people of England, strenuous and unwearied in my endeavours to destroy all the remains of despotic power among our free-born countrymen. I shall think it a glorious reward of my toils, if, in one instance only, a point of the utmost moment, grand juries may, through my efforts, recover the power, and right given them by the first principles of the constitution, which are at present entirely lost in the mode of proceeding by information, so long, to the great grievance of the subject, practiced both by the Attorney-general and the judges of the court of King's Bench. In this, and every other point of national liberty, I shall earnestly beg your assistance. I hope at all
times in public business to have the advantage of your counsels to perfect the plan of
securing and guarding the liberties of the freest nation in the world, against future attacks of wicked ministers, or even encroachments of the crown; which security can only be obtained by the most wholesome laws and the wisest regulations, built on the firm basis of Magna Charta, the great preserver of the lives, freedom, and property of Englishmen.
 I am, GENTLEMEN, Under encreasing obligations, Your faithful and obedient
Humble servant,
King's Bench prison,
Thursday, Nov. 3, 1768
JOHN WILKES

