Letters to Junius
9/12/71
   I do not mean to indulge the impertinent curiosity of finding out the most important secret of our times, the author of Junius. I will not attempt with profane hands to tear
the sacred veil of the sanctuary; I am disposed with the inhabitants of Attica, to erect an altar to the unknown god of our political idolatry, and will be content to worship him in clouds and darkness.
   This very circumstance, however, deeply embarrasses me. The first letter with which I
was honoured by Junius, called for a thousand anecdotes of Crosby, Sawbridge, and Townshend, too tedious, too minute, to throw upon paper, which yet must be acted upon, and, as he well knows, mark the character of men. Junius has, in my idea, too favourable sentiments of Sawbridge. I allow him honest, but think he has more mulishness than understanding, more understanding than candour. He is become the absolute dupe of Malagrida's gang. He has declared, that if he was chosen mayor this year, he would not serve the office, but fine, because Townshend ought to be mayor. Such a declaration is certain, and in my opinion it borders on insanity. To me Sawbridge complained the
last year that his sheriffalty passed in a continual secret cabal of Beckford, Townshend and Horne, without the communication of any thing to him till the moment of execution. Sawbridge has openly acted against us. Our troops will not be brought at present to fight his battles. Mrs. Macauley has warmly espoused the common cause, and severely condemns her brother. Any overtures to Sawbridge, I believe, would have been rejected, perhaps treated with contempt, by not the best bred man in the island. How could I begin a negotiation when I was already pledged to Crosby, who has fed himself with the hope of that and the membership, by which I overcame his natural timidity? Junius sees the confidence I place in him. Could there be a prospect of any cordiality between Sawbridge and the popular party, at least so soon as his mayoralty? I should fear the Mansion House
would be besieged, and taken by the banditti of the Shelburnes. But what I am sure will be decisive to Junius, I was engaged to Crosby before I received the letter of Aug. 21, and I have not since found in him the least inclination to yield the favourite point. The membership of the city is a security to the public for his steadiness in the cause. Surely then it would have been imprudent to have wished a change. My duty to the people only makes me form a wish for Crosby. To make Crosby mayor, it is necessary to return to the court of aldermen another man so obnoxious that it is impossible for them to elect him. Bridgen I take to be this man. While he presided in the city, he treated them with insolence, was exceedingly rude and scurrilous to them personally, starved them at the
few entertainments he gave, and pocketed the city cash. As he has always voted on the popular side, we are justified to the livery in the recommendation of him, and the rest will be guessed. Crosby will probably be the loam tenens of Bridgen, if Bridgen is elected. I wrote the letter on this subject in the Public Advertiser of Sept. 5. The argument there is specious, although my private opinion is, the House of Commons will not again fall into that snare. Into another I am satisfied they will. The House of Lords too, will, I think, furnish a most interesting scene, in consequence of the powers they usurp, and the sheriff means the attack. I wish this great business, as I have projected it, could be unravelled in a letter or two to Junius, but the detail is too long and intricate. How greatly is it to be lamented that the few real friends of the public have so little communication of counsels, so few and only distant means of a reserved intercourse!
   I have no where met with more excellent and abundant political matter than in the letter
of Junius respecting the Bill of Rights. He ought to know from me, that the American Dr.
Lee (the Gazetteer's Junius Americanus) was the author of the too long Preamble, Articles, &c. They were, indeed, submitted to me on the morning of the day on which they passed, but I made few corrections. I disliked the extreme verbiage of every part, and wished the whole put again on the anvil. Sir Joseph Mawbey and I were of opinion to adjourn the business for a reconsideration, but the majority of the members were too impatient to have something go forth in their names to the public. It would have been
highly imprudent in sir Joseph or me to thwart them in so favourite a point, and the substance I indeed greatly approve. At all times I hate taking in other people's foul linen to wash. The Society of the Bill of Rights have been called my committee, and it has been said that they were governed entirely by me. This has spread a jealousy even among my friends. I was therefore necessitated to act the most cautious and prudent part. You cannot always do all the good you wish, and you are sometimes reduced to the necessity of yielding in a particular moment to conciliate the doubtful, the peevish, or the refractory. Junius may be assured that I will warmly recommend the formation of constitutional clubs in several parts of the kingdom. I am satisfied that nothing would more alarm the ministry. I agree that the shortening the duration of parliaments is the first and most important of all considerations, without which all the rest would be nugatory; but I am unhappy to differ with Junius in so essential a point as that of triennial parliaments. They are inadequate to the cure of destroying dependance in the members on the crown. They only lessen, not root out, corruption, and only reduce the purchase money for an annuity of three instead of seven years. I have a thousand arguments against triennial and in favour of annual parliaments. The question was fairly agitated at the London Tavern, and several of your friends owned that they were convinced. The subject
is too copious for a letter. I hope to read Junius's mature and deliberate thoughts on this
subject. I own that in the House of Commons sound policy would rather favour triennial parliaments as the necessary road to annual, but the constitutional question is different.
   I am sorry likewise to differ with Junius as to the power dejure of the legislature to disfranchise any boroughs. How originated the right, and why was it granted? Old Sarum and Gatton, for instance, were populous places, when the right of representation was first given them. They are now desolate, and therefore in every thing should return to their former state. A barren mountain or a single farm-house can have no representation in parliament. I exceedingly approve lord Chatham's idea of increasing the number of knights of shires. If parliaments are not annual, I should not disapprove of a third part of the legislative body going out every year by ballot, and of consequence an annual
re-election in part.
   I am so much harassed with business at present, that I have not time to mention many
particulars of importance, and these three days I have had the shivering fits of a slow lurking fever, a strange disorder for Wilkes, which makes writing painful to me. I could plunge the patriot dagger in the heart of the tyrant of my country, but my hand would now tremble in doing it. In general I enjoy settled confirmed health, to which I have for some years paid great attention, chiefly from public views.
   I am satisfied that Junius now means me well, and I wish to merit more than his regard,
his friendship. He has poured balm into my wounds, the deepest of which I sigh, when I
recollect, were made by that now friendly hand. I am always ready to kiss his rod, but I hope its destination is changed, and that it will never again fall as heavy upon me as towards the conclusion of the year 1769, when Thurlow said sneeringly, the government prosecuted Junius out of compliment to Wilkes. I warmly wish Junius my friend. As a public man I think myself secure of his support, for I will only depend on popular favour, and pursue only the true constitutional points of liberty. As a private person I figure to myself that Junius is as amiable in the private as he is great in the public walk of life. I now live very much at home, happy in the elegant society of a sensible daughter, whom Junius has noticed in the most obliging manner.
   I have not had a moment's conversation with Woodfall on the subject of our correspondence, nor did I mean to mention it to him. All he can guess, will be from the following card, which I shall send by my servant with this letter. "Mr. Wilkes presents his compliments to Mr. Woodfall, and desires him to direct and forward the enclosed to Junius." After the first letter of Junius to me, I did not go to Woodfall to pry into a secret I had no right to know. The letter itself bore the stamp of Jove. I was neither doubting nor impertinent. I wish to comply with every direction of Junius, to profit by his hints, and to have the permission of writing to him on any important occasion. I desire to assure him, that in all great public concerns, I am perfectly free from every personality either of dislike or affection. The Stoic apathy is then really mine.
   Lord Chatham said to me ten years ago, "*** is the falsest hypocrite in Europe." I must hate the man as much as even Junius can, for through this whole reign almost it has been **** versus Wilkes. This conduct will probably make it Wilkes versus * ***. Junius must imagine that no man in the island feels what he writes on that occasion more than I do.
   This letter is an emanation of the heart, not an effort of the head. It claims attention from the honest zeal and sincerity of the writer, whose affection for his country will end only with his life.
JOHN WILKES.

SIR, Sept. 19, 1771.
I had last night the honour of your letter of yesterday's date. I am just going to the Common Hall, but first take up the pen to thank you for the kindness you express to me,
and to say that the Bill of Rights meet next Tuesday. I thought it necessary not to lose a
moment in giving you this information, that whatever you judge proper may be submitted to that Society as early as possible. Junius may command me in every thing. When he says, does he wish it should be communicated to the Society, and in what manner? The beginning of the second letter refers to a first letter, and some other expressions may be improper for the knowledge of the Society. I wait Junius's directions. I beg his free sentiments on all occasions. I mean next week to state a variety of particulars for his consideration and in answer to his letter. I had now only a moment to mention a point of
business and a feeling of gratitude.
JOHN WILKES

Yesterday I attended the meeting of the Society of the Bill of Rights, and laid before
them the letter, which I had the honour of receiving from you on the 7th of September. The few lines of the preamble I omitted, the word ridiculous, according to your directions, and a very few more lines towards the conclusion. All the rest was a faithful transcript, the exact tenor. The season of the year occasioned the meeting to be ill attended. Only eleven members were present. The following resolution passed unanimously: "That Mr. Wilkes be desired to transmit to Junius the thanks of the
Society for his letter, and to assure him, that it was received with all the respect due to his distinguished character and abilities." Soon after my fever obliged me to return home, and I have hot heard of any thing further being done; but Mr. Lee told me he thought the letter capable of a full answer, which he meant, on a future day, to submit to the Society, and would previously communicate to me. The letter is left in the hands of Mr. Reynolds, who has the care of the other papers of the Society, with directions to permit every member to peruse, and even transcribe it, on the promise of non-publication. Some particular expressions appeared rather too harsh and grating to the ears of some of the members.
   Surely, Sir, nothing in the advertisement I inserted in the Public Advertiser, could lead to the idea of the two letters I mentioned coming from Junius. I entreat him to peruse once more that guarded advertisement. I hope that Mr. Bull's and my address of Saturday, was approved where I most desire it should be thought of favourably. I know it made our enemies wince in the most tender part.
I am too ill to-day to add more.
JOHN WILKES

   I am not yet recovered, and to-day have been harassed with complaints against the greatest villains out of hell, the bailiffs; but so very polite and friendly a letter as Junius's of yesterday, demands my earliest and warmest acknowledgments. I only take up the pen to say, that I think myself happy in his approbation, that a line of applause from him gives the same brisk circulation to my spirits, as a kiss from Chloe, and that I mean soon to communicate to him a project of importance.  --  I will skirmish with the great almost every day in some way or other.
   Does Junius approve the following manoeuvre, instead of going in a gingerbread chariot to yawn through a dull sermon at St. Paul's. 
   I hope the Sheriff's letter to Mr. Akerman has your approbation. Does Junius wish for any dinner or ball tickets for the lord mayor's day, for himself, or friends, or a favourite, or Junia? The day will be worth observation. Whether creta an carbone notandus, I do not know; but the people, Sir, the people are the sight. How happy should I be to see my Portia here dance a graceful minuet with Junius Brutus! but Junius is inexorable and I submit. I would send your tickets to Woodfall.
  To-morrow I go with the Lord Mayor and my brother sheriff to Rochester to take up our
freedoms. We return on Sunday night. I entreat of Junius to favour me with every idea, which occurs to him for the common cause, in every particular relative to my conduct. He shall find me no less grateful than
ductile.  JOHN WILKES

I do not delay a moment giving you the information you wish. I enclose a copy of Eyre's commitment. Nothing else in this business has been reduced to writing. The examination was before the sitting justice, alderman Hallifax, at Guildhall; and it is not usual to take it in writing, on account of the multiplicity of business there. The paper was found upon him. He was asked what he had to say in his defence, his answer was, I hope you will bail
me. Mr. Holder, the clerk, answered, That is impossible. There never was an instance of it when the person was taken in the fact, or the goods found upon him. I believe Holder's law is right. Alderman Hallifax likewise granted a search warrant prior to the examination. At Eyre's lodgings many more quires of paper were found, all marked on purpose, from a suspicion of Eyre. After Eyre had been some time at Wood Street Compter, a key was found in his room there, which appears to be a key to the closet at Guildhall, from whence the paper was stolen. The Lord Mayor refused to bail Eyre, but I do not find that any fresh examination was taken at the Mansion-house. The circumstances were well known. I was present at the examination before Hallifax, but as sheriff could not interfere, only I whispered Hallifax he could not bail Eyre. Anglus in today's Public Advertiser told some particulars I had mentioned. I did not know of that letter; it is Mr. Bernard's of Berkeley Square. As to the Americans, I declare I know no difference between an inhabitant of Boston in Lincolnshire, and of Boston in New England. I honour the Americans; but our ancestors who staid and drove out the tyrant,
are justly greater in merit and fame than those who fled and deserted their countrymen. Their future conduct has been a noble atonement, and their sons have much surpassed them. I will mention to Dr. Lee what you desire. You shall have every communication you wish from me. Yet I beg Junius to reflect a moment. To whom am I now writing? I am all doubt and uncertainty, though not mistrust or suspicion. I should be glad to canvass freely every part of a great plan. I dare not write it to a man I do not know, of whose connections I am totally ignorant. I differ with Junius in one point: I think by being concealed he has infinite advantages which I want. I am on the Indian coast, where, from the fire kindled round me, I am marked out to every hostile arrow which knows its way to me. Those who are in the dark are safe, from the want of direction of the pointless shaft. I followed Junius's advice about the card on the anniversary of the King's accession. I dropped the idea. I wish to know his sentiments about certain projects against the usurped powers of the House of Lords. The business is too vast to write, too hazardous to communicate, to an unknown person. Junius will forgive me. "What can be done?  --  Alas! where is the man, after all Wilkes has experienced, in whose friendly bosom he can repose his secret thoughts, his noble but most dangerous designs? The person most capable he can have no access to, and all others he will not trust. I stand alone, isole as the French call it, a single column, unpropped, and perhaps nodding to its fall.
JOHN WILKES

A necessary attention to my health engrossed my time entirely in the few holidays I spent at Bath, and I am rewarded with being perfectly recovered. The repairs of the clay cottage, to which I am tenant for life, seem to have taken place very successfully; and the
building will probably last a few more years in tolerable condition. 
   Yesterday I met the Supporters of the Bill of Rights at the London Tavern. Much discourse passed about the publication of Junius's letter. Dr. Lee and Mr. Watkin Lewes, who were both suspected, fully exculpated themselves. I believe the publication was owing to the indiscretion of Mr. Patrick Cawdron, a linen-draper in Cheapside, who shewed it to his partner on the Saturday. The partner copied it on the Sunday, and the Monday following it appeared in the Morning Chronicle. The Gazetteer only copied it from thence. The Society directed a disavowal of their publication of it to be sent to
you, and are to take the letter into consideration at the next meeting. I forgot to mention that Mr. Cawdron keeps the papers of the Society.
   The winter campaign will begin with the next week. I believe that the sheriffs will have
the old battle renewed with the Commons, and I suppose the Lord Mayor and the courtly aldermen will commit the printer for us to release. Another scene will probably open with the Lords.  The progress of the business I suspect will be this  --  a bitter libel against Pomfret, Denbigh, or Talbot, attacking the peer personally, not in his legislative or
judicial capacity, will appear. His Lordship, passion's slave, will complain to the House.
They will order the printer into custody, and set a heavy fine. The sheriffs the next morning will go to Newgate, examine the warrant of commitment, and, like the angel to Peter, take the prisoner by the hand, and conduct him out of prison; afterwards they will probably make their appeal to the public against the usurpation of their Lordships, and their entirely setting aside the power of juries in their proceedings. Are there more furious wild beasts to be found in the upper den than the three I have named? Miller, the printer of the London Evening Post, at No. 2, Queen's Head Passage, Paternoster Row, is the best man I know for this business. He will print whatever is sent him. He is a fine Oliverian soldier. I intend a manifesto with my name on Monday to give spirit to the printers, and to shew them who will be their protector. I foresee it will make the two Houses more cautious, but it is necessary for our friends, and the others shall be baited
till they are driven into the snare. Adieu.
JOHN WILKES
