Letter to Worthy Electors
THE very honourable, unanimous, and repeated marks of esteem, you conferred on me, by committing to my trust your liberty, safety, property, and all those glorious, privileges, which are your birth-right as Englishmen, entitle you to my warmest thanks and to the highest tribute of gratitude my heart can pay. Yet in the peculiar circumstances of my case, I think that I ought not at present to rest contented with thanking you. I have always found a true pleasure in submitting to you my parliamentary conduct. It is now more
particularly my duty, and when I reflect on the real importance and interesting nature of those great events, in which, as your representative, I have been more immediately concerned, I am exceedingly anxious not barely to justify myself, but to obtain the sanction of your approbation. It has ever been my ambition to approve myself worthy of the choice you have more than once made of me as your deputy to the great council
of the nation, with an unanimity equally honourable and indearing. The consciousness of having faithfully discharged my trust, of having acted an upright and steady part in Parliament, as well as in the most arduous circumstances, makes me dare to hope, that you will continue to me what I most value, the good opinion and friendship of my worthy constituents.
  Having the happiness of being born in the country, where the name of Vassal is unknown, where Magna Charta is the inheritance of the subject, I have endeavoured to support and merit those privileges, to which my birth gave me the clearest right.
   The various charges brought against me may be reduced to two heads. The one is of a public, the other of a private nature. The first is grounded on the political paper of the North Briton, No. 45: the other respects a small part of a ludicrous poem, which was stolen out of my house. The two Accusations are only so far connected, that I am convinced, there is not a man in England, who believes, that if the first had not appeared, the second would ever have been called in question ...
   The first charge is, that The North Briton, No 45, is a false Libel. . .
   On my trial before Lord Mansfield, the word false was omitted in the indictment
The word false is not to be found among the various epithets applied to this paper in either of the warrants issued by Lord Halifax. By the first warrant, under which I
was apprehended, The North Briton, No. 45, was denominated a treasonable paper. In the second, by which I was committed to the Tower, that word too was omitted, so that the
greatest enemies of this paper seem to give up its being either false or treasonable. ... It is remarkable, that the epithet traiterous is given to insurrection, as the supposed Consequence of a supposed libel; whereas the Scots, who appeared in open rebellion so
lately as 1745, were, in the weekly writings against the North Briton, published under the patronage of the Scottish Minister, and paid for by him out of the  -- , only termed insurgents who defeated regular forces. Yet in fact, no insurrection of any kind
ever did or could follow from this publication, even in those parts of the
kingdom, so lately subjected to all the insolence and cruelty of the most despicable of our species, the mean petty Exciseman. This is the strongest case, which can possibly be put. The Excise is the most abhorred monster, which ever sprung from arbritary power, and the new mode of it is spoken of through this paper as the greatest grievance on the subject; yet even in this cafe, obedience to the laws, and all lawful authority, is strictly enjoined, and no opposition, but what is consistent with the laws and the constitution, is allowed. The words are very temperate, cautious, and well guarded.  "Every legal Attempt of a contrary tendency to the spirit of concord will he deemed a justifiable resistance, warranted by the spirit of the English constitution." Is this withdrawing the
people from their obedience to the Laws of the realm? Is resistance recommended, but expressly only so far as it is strictly legal? Let the impartial public determine, whether this is the language of Sedition, or can have the least tendency to excite traiterous insurrections.
   The general charge that the North Briton, No. 45, is a libel, scarcely deserves an answer, because the term is vague, and still remains undefined by our law. Every man applies it to what he dislikes. A spirited satire will be deemed a libel by a wicked minister, and by a corrupt judge, who feel, or who dread the lash The North Briton did not suffer the public to be misled. He acknowledged no privileged vehicle of fallacy. He considered the liberty of the press as the bulwark of all our liberties, as instituted to open the eyes of the people; and he seems to have thought it the duty of a political writer to follow truth wherever it leads. In his behalf I would ask even Lord Mansfield, Can Truth be a Libel? Is it so in the King's Bench? This unlucky paper is likewise said, and by the hirelings of the ministry it is always in private charged with personal disrespect to the King. It is however, most certain, that not a single word personally disrespectful to his Majesty is to be found in any part of it. On the contrary, the sovereign is mentioned not only in terms of decency, but with that regard and reverence, which is due from a good subject to a good King  --  a Prince of so many great and amiable qualities whom England truly reveres  --  the personal character of our present amiable sovereign makes us easy and happy that so great a power is lodged in such hands. . . .
The author of that paper, so far from making any personal attack on his sovereign, has even vindicated him personally from some of the late measures, which were so severely censured by the judicious and unbiased public. . ...
He exclaims with an honest indignation, What a shame was it to see the security of this country, in point of military force, complimented away, contrary TO THE OPINION OF ROYALTY itself, and sacrificed to the prejudices, and to the ignorance of a set of people, the most unfit from every consideration, to be consulted on a manner relative to the security of the House of Hanover?  The minister is indeed every where treated with the contempt and indignation he has merited, but he is ever carefully distinguished from
the sovereign. Every kingdom in the world has, in its turn, found occasion to lament that princes of the best intentions have been deceived and misled by wicked and designing
ministers and favourites. It has likewise, in most countries, been the fate of the new daring patriots, who have honestly endeavoured to undeceive their sovereign, to feel the heaviest marks of his displeasure. It is, however, I think rather wonderful among us, even in these times, that a paper which contains the most dutiful expressions of regard to his Majesty, should be treated with such unusual severity, and yet that so many other
publications of the fame date, full of the most deadly venom, should pass totally unregarded. Some of these papers contained the most opprobrious reflections on that true patron of liberty, the late king, whose memory is embalmed with the tears of Englishmen, while his ashes are rudely trampled upon by others, whom his godlike attribute of mercy pardoned the crime of unprovoked rebellion. Others were full of the most indecent abuse on our great protestant ally, the King of Prussia, on the near relation of his present Majesty, who has merited so highly of the nation by fixing the crown in the house of Hanover; on the stanchest friends of freedom, the city of London; and on the first characters among us. Yet all these papers have passed uncensured by ministers, secretaries, and by the two Houses of Parliament. . .
   There only remains one other charge, . . .
Under the arbitrary Stuarts, when our more than Roman senates dared to bring truth to the foot of the throne, and made the trembling tyrant obey her sacred voice, the nation was in
love with parliaments, because they were the steady friends of liberty, and never met but in favour of the subject to redress real grievances. . .
   I have thus, Gentlemen, gone thro' all the objections made against this paper . . the treatment I have experienced as the supposed author. . .
Orders were given by the deceased secretary of state, to drag me out of my bed at midnight. A good deal of humanity, and some share of timidity, prevented the execution of such commands. I was made a prisoner in my own house by several of the king's messengers, who only produced a general warrant, issued without oath, neither naming nor describing me. I therefore refused to obey a warrant which I knew to be illegal.
I was, however, by violence carried before the earls of Egremont and Halifax, who thought it worth their while to ask me a tolerable number of plain questions, to not one of
which I thought it worth my while to give a plain answer. It is no small satisfaction to me now to know, that I have not a friend in the world who wishes a single word unsaid by me in the critical moment of that examination. I informed their lordships of the orders actually given by the Court of Common Pleas for my Habeas Corpus, notwithstanding which I was committed to the Tower, the custody of me shifted into other hands, and that
act for the liberty of the subject eluded. Altho' the offence of which I stood accused was undoubtedly bailable, yet for three days every person was refused admittance to me; and the governor was obliged to treat me in a manner very different from the great humanity of his nature, for he had received orders to consider me as a close prisoner. I rejoice that I can say, I am the only instance of such rigorous treatment since the accession of the mild house of Brunswick, although the Tower has twice been crowded even with Rebels from the northern parts of the island; and therefore I shall continue to regret the policy ... of conferring on Scotsmen all the governments of the few conquests not tamely given up by the Scottish minister; conquests won by the valour of the united forces of England, Scotland and Ireland. While I suffered this harsh confinement, my house in Great George-street was plundered, all my papers were seized, and some of a very nice and delicate nature, not bearing the most distant relation to the affairs of government, were divulged. . .
   When I was brought before the Common Pleas, I pleaded the cause of universal liberty. It was not the cause of peers and gentlemen only, but of all the midling and inferior class of people, who stand most in need of protection, which, I observed was on that day
the great question before the court. I was discharged from imprisonment by the unanimous sentence of my judges, without giving any bail or security. On the first day of the meeting of the parliament, I humbly submitted my grievances to the House
of Commons, as they were chosen to be the guardians of the liberties of the people against the despotism of ministers. I likewise voluntarily entered my appearance to the actions brought at law against me as soon as I knew the determination of the majority,
that all the irregularities against me should be justified, and that no privilege should be allowed in my case, even as to the mode of proceeding, which was the most harsh the rancour of party could devise. 
   I now proceed to the other charge brought against me, which respects an idle poem, called, An Essay on Woman, and a few other detached verses.  If so much had not been said on this subject, I should be superior to entering upon any justification of myself, because I will always maintain the right of private, opinion in its full extent, when it is not followed by giving any open public offence to any establishment, or indeed to any individual. The crime commences from thence, and the Magistrate has a right to interpose, and even to punish, Outrageous and indecent attacks on what any
community has decreed to be sacred, not only the rules of good breeding,
but the laws of society are then infringed. In my own closet I had a right to examine, and even to try by the keen edge of ridicule any opinions I pleased. If I have laughed pretty
freely at the glaring absurdities of a creed, which our great Tillotson wished
the church of England was fairly rid of, it was in private I laughed. . .
. . I gave, however, no offence to any one individual of the community. The fact is, that after the affair of the North Briton, bribed one of my servants to steal a part of the Essay on Woman, and the other pieces, out of my house. Not quite a fourth part of the volume had been printed at my own private press. The work had been discontinued for several months before I had the least knowledge of the theft. Of that fourth part only twelve copies were worked off, and I never gave one of those copies to any friend. In this infamous manner did get possession of this new subject of accusation, and except in the case of Algernon Sidney, of this new species of Crime; for a S___ only could make
the refinement in tyranny of ransacking and robbing the recesses of closets and studies, in order to convent private amusements into state crimes. After the servant had been bribed to commit the theft in his master's house, the most abandoned man of the age, was bribed to make a complaint , that I had published an infamous poem which no man there had ever seen. It was read before excellent judges of wit and poetry.  The neat, prim,
smirking chaplain of that babe of grace, that gude cheeld of the prudish Kirk of
Scotland, the ___ was highly offended at my having made an Essay on Woman. His nature could not forgive me that ineffable crime, and his own conduct did not afford me the shadow of an apology. In great wrath he drew his grey goose quill against me. The pious peer caught the alarm, and they both pour'd forth, most woeful lamentations, their tender hearts overwhelmed with grief or as the chaplain, who held the pen, said, with grief of griefs. He proceeded to make very unfair extracts, and afterwards to benote them in the foulest manner. The most vile blasphemies were forged, and published as part of a work which in reality contained but a few portraits drawn warm from life, with the too high colouring of a youthful fancy, and two or three descriptions, perhaps too luscious, which though nature and woman might pardon, a Kidgel and a  --  --  could not fail to
condemn.
   I have now, gentlemen, gone thro' all the objections which have been made to my conduct in a public capacity. My enemies finding that I was invulnerable, where they pointed their most envenomed darts, afterwards attempted to assassinate my private character, and propagated an infinite variety of groundless calumnies against me. I have generally treated these with the contempt they deserved, from the certainty that all who knew me would know that I was incapable of the things laid to my charge. A few falshoods, advanced with more boldness than the rest, I was at the pains to refute. The Winchester story in particular, because it respected Lord Bute's own son, and had been ushered to the public with the greatest parade, as well as with all the impudence of malice, and rage of party, I disproved so fully, that I am sure not the least shadow of a doubt remained in any man's mind as to my entire innocence of that most illiberal charge.
I have lived so long among you, gentlemen, that I will rest every thing respecting me as a private man to the testimony, which the experience of so many years authorizes you to give, well knowing, that true candour always weighs in the same balance, faults and virtues. The shades in private life are darkened by an enemy, but scarcely seen by a friend. Besides, it is not given to every man to be as pious as lord  --  -- , or as chaste in
and out of the marriage bed, in all thought, word, and deed, as the  -- . 
   A few other particulars, gentlemen, deserve to be mentioned, that you may have before you the whole of my conduct in these interesting affairs. Immediately after the last flagrant breach of the laws, I thought it my duty to the community to commence
actions against all the persons guilty. I despised the meanness of attacking only agents and deputies. I endeavoured to bring to the jurisdiction of the law the principals  --  -- , the two secretaries of State. I blush for my country when I add, that though I have employed the ablest gentlemen of that profession, they have hitherto found it impossible even to force an appearance. Lord Egremont died -- . Lord Halifax lives. The judicial proceeding at my suit, commenced at the beginning of May twelvemonth, and now in the end of
October in the present year, his lordship has not entered any appearance. The little offenders indeed have not escaped. Several honest juries have marked them with
ignominy, and their guilt has been followed with legal punishment. But what is of infinitely greater importance to the nation, we have heard from the bench, that general warrants are absolutely illegal. Such a declaration is in the highest degree interesting to the subject.
   When I reflect on these two most important determinations in favour of Liberty, the best cause and the noblest stake for which men can contend, I congratulate my free-born countrymen, and am full of gratitude that Heaven inspired me with a firmness and
fortitude equal to the conduct of so arduous a business. The goodness of the cause supported me, and I never lost sight of the great object which I had from the first in my view, the preservation of the rights and privileges of Englishmen. I glory in the name, and will never forget the duties resulting from it. Though I am driven into exile from my dear
country, I shall never cease to love and reverence its constitution, while it remains free. It will continue my first ambition to approve myself a faithful son of England; and I shall
always be ready to give my life a willing sacrifice to my native country, and to what it holds most dear, the security of our invaluable liberties. While I live, I shall enjoy the satisfaction of thinking that I have not lived in vain; that the present age has borne the noblest testimony to me, and that my name will pass with honour to posterity, for the upright and disinterested part I have acted, and for my unwearied endeavours to protest
and secure the persons, houses, and papers of my fellow Subjects from arbritary visits
and seizures.
