OBSERVATIONS ON THE PAPERS RELATIVE TO THE
Rupture with SPAIN

I much regret that it is not yet in my Power fully to gratify the Curiosity you express of seeing all the Papers relative to the Rupture with Spain. The Subject is so very interesting, that I am not surprized at your Impatience. My Concern is, that so much
is withheld from the Public, and that a Person, uninformed as I am, cannot pretend with Clearness to unravel the Thread of a Negociation, designedly kept intricate and embarrassed. I fear you will find some Thing's rather obscure; but I will endeavour
to pour all the Light 1 can on the Subject, and to dissipate every Cloud of Obscurity which is meant to cover it. Had the Public been gratified with a Sight of the Memorials and Papers relating to the Demand of Liberty to the Spanish Nation to fish on the Banks of Newfoundland (a Matter held sacred), and to the other Claims, equally unjust, made by the Count de Fuentes, which were moved for in the House of Commons on the 11th of December last, we might, with a tolerable Degree of Accuracy, have known something more of the Merits of the present Quarrel with Spain. Not one of these appears, nor have we any Paper or Memorial from Spain (not even that delivered to Lord Bristol in January last), nor any Answer of the Court of England since the Accession of his present Catholic Majesty (important as that Period must naturally seem to be) to the last Autumn. In vain have I wished for the famous Memorial which the Court of Spain returned as inadmissible, that I might have compared it with M. de Bussy's; since the late Minister publicly declared that was the precedent he followed with respect to the Memorial
of Spanish Affairs given in by France. It is undoubtedly of much Consequence to know both the Matter and Expressions of that Memorial returned by Spain, as it might probably relate to one of the three Points in Negociation, Prizes, Logwood, or the Fishery. In the present Collection (which was laid before both Houses of Parliament on the 29th of January, but not Printed and delivered to the Members till the 12th of Februry), there is not a Line previous to the Memorial delivered to Mr. Secretary Pitt, by M. de Bussy, July 23, 1761; nor is there any Intelligence from Paris, where the Family Compact of the House of Bourbon was Negociated and signed by Grimaldi, and where, it is said, the Measures to be taken against Portugal were concerted. An Extract of one Letter only of Mr. Pitt's is inserted, which is dated July 28, the Answer to which is received September 11. Not a Syllable after that Period from this Court to Lord Bristol, till the 28th of October, when Lord Egremont declares he opens his Correspondence, p. 20. It is indeed
very astonishing, and gives no great Idea of the Vigilance or Attention of Administration, that while Affairs were so critical between the two Nations, no Directions for the Conduct of Lord Bristol were sent to Madrid during so long a Period. But can it be imagined that so acute, so well-informed a Minister as Mr. Stanley certainly was, should not transmit from Paris any intelligence of that most alarming Treaty, which was negociating all the Summer at Paris? It appears by the Accounts published by the French Court, that the Family Compact was signed at Versailles the 15th of August, and ratified
the 8th of September. Lord Temple, in a great assembly, did declare that Intelligence of the highest Moment relative to these Matters was transmitted to this Court before the
Advice in Writing, dated the 18th of September, which occasioned certain Resignations. Nothing of this kind is published in the Papers relative to the Rupture with Spain, though undoubtedly Intelligence constitutes a most material Part of those Papers. If we have not the Satisfaction of judging for ourselves from the Whole of a Case, I will do the late Minister the Justice to say, that it cannot be imputed to him. He pressed with honest Zeal
the laying before the Public every Paper relative to the six Years Negotiation with Spain, that the Justice and Candour of the Crown of England on the one hand, and the Chicanery, Insolence, and Perfidy of Spain on the other, might be apparent to all the
World: But this was refused; for had it been granted, all the atrocious Calumnies so industriously circulated, of his Aversion to Peace, and his Endeavours to perpetuate and encrease the War, had been laid open to Mankind, and the Authors of them held in just Abhorrence. I own the Appeal to so much written Evidence, spoke to me the strongest Language of Conscious Integrity, and I was charmed with an Example, which I am sure Mr. Pitt did not draw from any of his Predecessors in this Country.  --  They have ever sought, like Mr. Pitt's Successors, to cover and conceal, or at least to perplex; he
wishes to lay open and reveal to the unerring Public, both the motives and Actions of every Part of his Administration.  --  A Retrospect carries no Terrors but to the Guilty -- to an upright Minister it must give the truest Satisfaction  --  to the Public that Conviction it has in many Cases a Right to expect.
   I was not a little surprised, and I own greatly concerned at the Alarm you mention, spread every where in your Parts, of the melancholy and ruined State of our Country, and
the necessity we were under of accepting almost any Peace. The French, Lord Bristol says, have never discontinued assuring the Spaniards of our being exhausted by the present long and expensive war, p. 29: and they may add that we have those among us (but, happily for this Nation, they are few, and their Credit but small) who repine at our Successes, and declare they weep over our Victories. This is the true Picture of that most malignant and infernal Fiend, Envy, so well described by Ovid; Vixque tenet lacrymas, quia nil lacrvmabile cernit.
And a little before he mentions what rankled at the Heart; Sed videt ingratos, intabescitque videndo Successus hominis.
I doubt not these Men do very sincerely lament the Successes even of their own Country; for I well remember the favourite Language they held a few Years ago. Now Heaven has given such glorious Success to upright Intentions, and well-digested Plans, while the rest of their Countrymen are congratulating each other on all our noble Conquests and real Acquisitions of Strength, these Men, as well as our declared Enemies, are found in Sorrow and Tears. How preposterous is such a Conduct? Yet did not some of these
very Men execrate those as Traitors to their Country, who were not fired with Rapture at the Victory of Culloden? A Victory as justly dear to every Friend of Liberty as any our Annals can boast.
   But let us on the other hand exult, and rejoice to fee how greatly this Country now figures in the unprejudiced Judgment of Foreigners, even of our Enemies. The Prime Minister of Spain tells Lord Bristol, That the Court of London was in the most flourishing and most exalted Situation it had ever known, occasioned by the greatest Series of Prosperities that any Single Nation had ever met with, p. 10. Can we wonder after this, that so much Abuse, such gross Scurrility, on Mr. Pitt, appears in Fuentes's Papers? Is it not the highest Panegyric? I am persuaded, had the Direction of the British Counsels been suffered to continue in the same Hands, the Name of Pitt had soon been as much dreaded at Madrid as it is at Paris, or as it is dear to his grateful Countrymen. I speak with the honest Warmth and Pride of an Englishman, who really feels with his Sovereign the great and important Services of Mr. Pitt, and glories: in seeing his Country recovered from the most abject State of Despair to such a Pitch of Grandeur and Importance, as to hold the first Rank among the Powers of Europe. 
   The other Report you mention, that the late Minister courted a War with Spain, will receive as full a Confutation from these Papers. I shall, from among many, produce only two Passages, but too express to admit the least Shadow of a Doubt. The first is from the Conclusion of the Extract of the only Letter we have of Mr. Pitt's in this garbled Collection. After the insolent Memorial of France relative to Spain was delivered here
by M. de Bussy, little short of a Declaration of a War in Reversion, and that not at a Distance, Mr. Pitt writes to Lord Bristol, In cafe, upon entering into Remonstrance on this Affair, you shall perceive a Disposition in M. Wall to explain away and disavow the Authorization of Spain to this offensive Transaction of France, and to come to categorical and satisfactory Declarations relatively to THE final Intentions of Spain, your Excellency will, with Readiness and your usual Address, adapt yourself to so desirable a Circumstance, and will open to the Court of Madrid as handsome a Retreat as may be, in case you perceive from the Spanish Minister that they sincerely wish to find one, and to remove, by an EFFECTUAL SATISFACTION, the unfavourable Impressions which this Memorial of France has justly and unavoidably made on the Mind of his Majesty,
p. 3, 4. Is this the Language of a Minister who courts a War? Is it not the Reverse? Does he not honestly point out the Means of avoiding a War, yet with the Dignity and Spirit becoming a great Power, which did not tremble at the haughty Menaces of the Spaniard?
   The other Passage contains the Tesminony of the Earl of Egremont: M. Wall must himself know that there has been a particular Delicacy observed, in concerting our Plans for military Operations, to avoid carrying Hostilities towards Objects, which might give the least Jealousy or Umbrage to the Court of Spain; and therefore his Majesty can only consider such unjust Suggestions and groundless Suspicions, as destitute of Probability as of Proof, as a mere Pretext, in cafe that, contrary to all good Faith, and the most solemn repeated Professions of friendly Intentions, the Court of Spain should have meditated or resolved on Hostilities against England, p. 31.
   I think it appears to demonstration, even from these Papers, that before the first Overtures of France for the particular Peace with England, Spain had resolved, at a proper Time, to take an efficient and openly hostile Part against us. M. de Buffy, in the Memorial relative to Spain, so early as July 23, talks of the Engagements, which the one
and the other Court may have taken prior to their Reconciliation, p. 4. Mr. Pitt's Letter of July 28, declares, The Duke de Choiseul avows the Engagements with Spain, concerning our Disputes with that Crown, to have been taken, before the first Overtures of France for the particular Peace with England. The first Overtures were dated the 26[th] of March, 1761. Lord Bristol, Aug. 31, gives an Account of the Conversation he had with General Wall, in which M. Wall declared, that M. Bussy's Memorial was Verbatim what had been sent by Order of the Catholic, King to Versailles, p. 6. In the same Letter, p. 11. The strong Avowal of a most intimate Cordiality between Spain and France contained in this last Production of the Spanish Secretary of State has hurt me. This Production was the famous Memorial of the 28[th] of August, which (with Lord Bristol's Letter of the 31st, and an Enclosure) was the last Paper Mr. Pitt ever received from the Court of Spain; as appears from the Date of his Resignation, October 5. The Memorial which M. de Bussy presented to Mr. Pitt, is a Step, which his Catholic Majesty will not deny has been taken with his full Consent, Approbation, and Pleasure. Paper delivered to the Earl of Bristol, p. 13, which next holds out mutual Assistance as their Union, Friendship, and Relationship require: then proceeds to a menacing Parallel, It being grounded upon this, that if England saw that France attacked the Dominions of Spain, particularly in America, she would run immediately to her Defence for her own Conveniency, as well as because she had, equally with France, guarantied them: and concludes with a Simile of obliging Delicacy betwixt crowned Heads, with regard to our Establishment on the Logwood Coast. Hard Proceedings certainly, for one to confess that he is gone into the House of another, to take away his Jewels, and to say, "I will go out again, but first you shall engage to give me what I went to take". So much for becoming Apologies! p. 16.
There is the greatest Harmony between the two Courts (France and Spain), p.
14. Particularly since the King (of Spain) sent your Excellency (the Conde
de Fuentes) to that Court (of London), proving the incontestible Grounds of, our
Complaints and just Cares, and repeating that without satisfying them, it is impossible to fix the good Correspondence of the two Monarchies, nor the "Friendship" of the two Monarch, p. 59. The Memorial itself presented by M. de Bussy, July 23, which was Verbatim sent from Spain, threatens a new War in Europe and America, if the Differences of Spain with England are not adjusted, of which, the French King says,
he shall be obliged to partake, p. 4. And in p. 39, General Wall says, What other Discussion of the Matter of our Disputes, than what has been agitated, during so long a Negociation; what other Expedients can be found to save the Honour and Dignity of the two Kings, that have not been proposed and exhausted in a Contest of six Years? And again, p. 40. A Negociation so strongly discussed, that it has been reduced during your Embassy (Count de Fuentes's) to the last Yes, or to the last No, in p. 60. What greater.
Discussion, upon the Points of our Disputes, can be made, than that which has been in so long a Negociation? What Expedients can be fallen upon now to save the Honour of the two Kings, which in Arguments and Disputes of six years have not occurred? Lord Bristol, Nov. 2, writes, I have long observed the Jealousy of Spain at the British Conquests, and am now convinced, that the Consciousness of this Country's Naval Inferiority has occasioned the soothing Declarations, so repeatedly made, of a Desire to maintain Harmony and Friendship with England, p. 29.
I believe I may even from these Premises take it as proved beyond Contradiction, that Spain had come to a final Resolution, and only waited for some favourable Events to throw off the Mask of Deceit and Treachery. The Denouement quickly followed, tho' probably rather sooner than Spain herself intended. Lord Bristol explains the true Reasons. In his Letter of Sept. 21, which was received here Oct. 16, he says, A Messenger arrived at St. Ildephonso last Week, with the News of the safe Arrival of the Flota in the Bay of Cadiz, p. 17. In the Letter of Nov. 2. Two Ships have lately arrived at Cadiz, with very extraordinary rich Cargoes from the West-Indies; SO THAT ALL THE WEALTH THAT WAS EXPECTED FROM SPANISH America is now safe in Old Spain, p. 29. And again, p. 35. Eleven large Ships of the Line, now lying at Ferrol, are rigged, manned, and ready to put to Sea at a short Warning, together with two Frigates, one of which is bound to the South Seas, with Cannon-ball, Powder, and many other Implements of War. By Advices from Barcelona, I hear that two of the Catholic King's Ships of War sailed from thence the End of last Month, with two large Ships under their Convoy, loaded with 3500 Barrels of Gunpowder, 1500 Bomb-Shells, 500 Chests of Arms, and a considerable Quantity of Cannon-balls of different Dimensions, which Cargo, it is imagined, is destined for the Spanish West Indies. Many more warlike Stores are ready to be shipped from Catalonia. Five Battalions of different Regiments of Infantry, and two Squadrons of Dragoons, are at Cadiz, waiting their final Orders to embark for America. This Corps makes in all about 3,600 Men, p. 35. Lord Egremont
says, And his Majesty having afterwards, (that is, between the 31st of August, and the 28th of October) received Intelligence, scarce admitting a Doubt, of Troops marching, and of military Preparations making in all the Ports of Spain, judged that his Dignity, as well as his Prudence, required him to order his Embassador at the Court of Madrid, by a Dispatch dated the 28[th] of October, to demand, &c p. 48.
   General Wall, thus prepared, at last comes out of his Intrenchments; for Spain no longer found her Account in dissembling. She had already taken her Part, and the old Traffick of Words and soothing Declarations was almost at an End. On November 2, (eight Days before Lord Bristol received the very first Dispatches from the new Ministry in England.) His Lordship writes Word of the surprizing Change in General Wall's Discourse, and an unlooked-for Alteration of Sentiments, and complains of the haughty Language now
held by this Court. M. Wall declares the Conduct of England unwarrantable, for his Catholic Majesty never could obtain an Answer to any Memorial or Paper -- that we were intoxicated with our Successes  --  and that it was evident all we aimed at was, first to ruin the French Power, in order more easily to crush Spain, to drive all the Subjects of the Christian King, not only from their Island-Colonies in the new World, but also to destroy their several Forts and Settlements upon the Continent of North-America, to have an easier Task in seizing on all the Spanish Dominions in those Parts, thereby to satisfy the utmost of our Ambition, and to gratify our unbounded Thirst of Conquest; and afterwards, that he would himself be the Man to advise the King of Spain, since his Dominions were to be overwhelmed, at least to have them seized with Arms in his Subjects Hands, and not to continue the passive Victim he had hitherto appeared to be in the Eyes of the World, p. 26. Now what new Evens, on the Part of England, since the Resignations, had happened to give Occasion to such a furious, futile, and menacing Declamation? Lord Bristol writes indeed, p. 64. What had occasioned the great Fermentation during that Period at this Court, the Effects of which, I felt from General Wall's animated Discourse at the Escurial, was the Notice having, about that Time, reached the Catholic King, that the Change which had happened in the English Administration, was relative to Measures proposed to be taken against this Country: But surely, almost in Lord Egremont's own Words, p. 32, used by Lord Bristol himself to
General Wall, the Notoriety there was that every Thing in the Royal Councils, which could tend towards the Interruption of a friendly Intelligence between our Courts (which his Majesty was so solicitous to maintain) had also been avoided, p. 62, with the consequential Resignations, must have produced in sound Argument a directly contrary Effect; whereas the Notice sent by his Lordship of the Spanish Preparations, and
his other Reasonings, account very fully for the General's Animation at that Time.
I think the Question then is reduced to this short Point, Does not the War with Spain, even in September, appear to have been unavoidable? Most evidently so, from all the Proofs contained in the foregoing Pages, and even from what is given us of Lord
Bristol's Letters, in particular that of August 31, with the Memorial inclosed, which was received here September 18, and was, to be sure, no small Part of the Ground, on which Lord Temple's and Mr. Pitt's written Advice of September 18, to recall Lord Bristol,
was founded Every Practice of the most: civilized States, every Formality prescribed by the Law of Nations, every Proceeding which the most: scrupulous Rules of good Faith, could require, might have been observed, and the noblest: Opportunity of expeditiously and gloriously terminating both a French and a Spanish War been seized, which is now irrecoverably lost. The firmest Nerves, of Spain, and with them the last Hopes of France, might soon have been withered, and the British Empire have received greater, and more important, Acquisitions, than any it yet can boast from the unparalleled, and dazzing
Successes, even of this glorious War.
   Whoever considers the situation of Spain (unprepared as she was at the time the written Advice was given ) with respect to her Ports, her Ships of War in those Ports, her Colonies, her Comerce, her own as well as the Riches of France on board her Ships, can
never sufficiently lament the Loss of an autumnal Campaign. If we add that the Fleet of England was at no Time so formidable, her Seamen never so full of Spirit, and flushed with repeated Victories, in Europe only upwards of 140 Ships of War, in the other Parts of the World above 100 more, we must sink in Amazement at our Supineness and Neglect of so critical a Period, aster so long Tameness under Injuries. I will add long Tameness under Injuries; for I think the Conduct of Spain, even during the six Years Negociation, was so grossly partial to our professed Enemies, as would have justified any overt Acts on the Side of England, from every Principle of Justice; but Motives of Moderation and Policy restrained us. The Affair of the Antigallican was alone of
such Magnitude, as to have called for Reprisals against a Court, which avowed such gross Partiality and Injustice, and committed such repeated Acts of the highest Indignity. Not
the least Satisfaction was ever offered, though often demanded. On the contrary, it was followed by many flagrant Acts of notorious Violence. It is a known Fact, that both the Law of Nations, and the established Customs of all Maritime States, have been violated by Spain in every one of her Ports, from a declared Partiality to the French. They were treated almost as natural-born Spaniards, tho' the Family Compact did not at that Time subsist, and the English as Enemies, tho' called Friends, to whom the King of Spain was ever declaring much Cordiality and Regard. Ruinous indeed it may prove for this Country, that the Administration, which for so many Years has continued unanimous in carrying on the War in Germany, unanimous likewise in rejecting the Terms of
Peace offered by France, should have differed in Opinion (if indeed they did so) with regard to the glaring Duplicity, and hostile Intentions, of the Court of Spain! It required alas! no great Scope of Judgment, nor any deep Sagacity, to discover the real Views, p. 24. of Spain, and that the War with that Power was inevitable. A Truth which most plainly appears from the very Papers published to conceal it. The only Question most
evidently was, whether we should enter into it with every Advantage on our Side, or from Weakness, Indecision, or a delusive Hope at best, give to our determined Enemy that Time to prepare, which it was notorious she wanted, lose the Season for Action, and sacrifice to the Imbecility of a few more last Words three most important Months, at the End of which we find ourselves reduced to the Necessity of breaking with Spain, exactly as we ought to have done so long before. Whoever can now pride himself in the procrastinating Advice he gave to his Sovereign, may he enjoy in full Lustre that eminent Glory of his Life ! If such are the Glories, what must the Disgraces be! I mean not to draw any uncandid Picture of the present Administration: I am sorry I must say, that we have had too much Experience of one Part of them, and too little of the other, to be very sanguine. Two S_s of S_e, in these dangerous Times, become Ministers by Inspiration! We have as little Experience of them, as they have of Business. In no Department of the
State, nor in Parliament, has either held any Rank or Estimation. But these Defects will be amply supplied by the Industry and Experience of a laborious Gentleman, who has long paced in the Trammels of the State, with no Ambition or Avarice to gratify. A Declaration the Public has heard repeatedly from himself. He neither
Ambitione mala, aut argenti pallet amore. Hor.
But may the Dignity of the Crown, the Honour of his Majesty, the Glory of the Nation, and the important Acquisitions made during the late Ministry, be safe in their Hands! Their Hands have been strengthened in every manner they could ask or wish; and no Opposition has been made to them; unless it is call'd Opposition, to endeavour to preserve the Confidence of our Allies once boundless, and to keep up the high Spirit of the Nation under the enormous, but necessary, Burthens of the War.
   In no truly British Quarrel, but in the Cause of our Allies, the Spanish Marine was destroyed by Sir George Byng, in 1718, without any previous Declaration of War. We were not, in consequence of that Step, treated in Europe as an uncivilized Nation, spurning at all Laws, or as a Nest of Pirates; but the Policy and Spirit of the Measure was universally admired. As to the "Justice of such a Proceeding, I determine nothing: I leave it to those State Casuists who seized the French Ships before a Declaration of War. The Interest of Great Britain was not then immediately concerned, as in the present Case, but our Allies wished, and obtained, our vigorous and effectual Support. By that decisive Exertion of our Strength, the Contest between the two Nations, was in Effect finished almost as soon as begun. The impartial Public will judge for themselves, how great the Probability is, that the like Success had followed Measures equally spirited, preceded by a Declaration of War, which in this Cafe had been founded on the clearest Principles of Justice and Equity. I am at least certain no Man of Candour could have censured England
as accelerating precipitately a War, long resolved by Spain, I must say, too long delayed by England. I rather fear the Example of the Spirit of the late Measures will be thought to
be already forgot; and as those Measures were decried as too bold and daring, more feeble, more pusilanimous, less encouraging to our real Friends, less hostile to our Enemies, will be found to be adopted. In the present Case, Lord Bristol is ordered, so early as July 28, to come to categorical and satisfactory Declarations relatively to the final Intentions of Spain, Mr. Pitt's Letter, p. 3. to which Lord Bristol, on the Part of Spain, never returns either a categorical or satisfactory Answer. The ingenuous General Wall, through the whole Negociation, appears reserved and artful at least, not to say full of Duplicity. At last General Wall replied, He had no Orders to acquaint me with any Measures but what he had formerly communicated to me; and signified his not being at Liberty to say any more, Nov. 2. p. 27. All that I could, with Difficulty, extort from General Wall was, that his Catholic Majesty had judged it expedient to renew his Family Compacts (those were the express Words) with the Most Christian King  --  Here the Spanish Minister stopt short, and, as if he had gone beyond what he intended, he said, that the Count de Fuentes, and M. Bussy, had declared to his Majesty's Ministers all that was meant to be communicated to them, Nov. 2. p. 29. Can any thing be imagined more contemptuous, or more insolent ? But what follows is excellent Spanish Humour , and the inimitable Hogarth could, from these few Lines, give us a most diverting Frontispiece to the Papers, if Administration did not seem resolved no more to employ Men of superior Parts and Genius. Lord Bristol says, I began to flatter myself I might obtain the categorical Answer, I was ordered to demand, without the Spanish Minister's suspecting my ultimate Orders. When I was going out of his Room, he took me by the Hand, and said, with a Smile, he hoped; but there he stopped. I asked him what he hoped, that I might also hope, and that all might concur in the same Hopes: But his Excellency only then bowed, and took his Leave of me, p. 63. General Wall is too much of a Spaniard ever to laugh; but his Smiles are very significant. Lord Bristol declares, M. Wall
ever acted in too ingenuous a Manner for me to suspect the least Duplicity in his Conduct, p. 19. Now was he ever ingenuous and frank enough to communicate to Lord Bristol, the least Article of the Family Compact, or did he ever hint that such a Thing was in Agitation? From the Catholic King' very particular Partiality towards Lord
Bristol, p. 66. I suppose M. Wall was ordered to spare his Lordship the Concern so alarming a Treaty must have occasioned, and only, from time to time, to use the soothing Sounds of Friendship, Honour, Cordiality, Affection, &c. &c. to smile, to bow, to take
him by the Hand, and to  --  hope. What? I know no more than the present Ministry.
   Lord Bristol seems totally uninformed of so important an Affair as the Family Compact, till long after that Treaty was signed and ratified, and only a few Days before he is told of it from England. October 28, Lord Egremont writes to Lord Bristol: His
Majesty cannot imagine that the Court of Spain should think it unreasonable to desire a Communication of the Treaty acknowledged to have been lately concluded between the Courts of Madrid and Versailles, p. 21. When was this Acknowledgment made? Surely this relates to the Rupture with Spain? Yet not a Line of this Intelligence is among the Papers.
   By this Time, I think it must appear how much Lord Bristol, though possessed of real Talents, was deceived by the Court of Spain; a Court as insidious as that of France. Let me next remark, how dextrous the new Ministry here were in endeavouring to deceive themselves. In the Answer delivered to the Count de Fuentes, by the Earl of Egremont, Dec. 31, it is said, The Embassador at the Court of Madrid, by a Dispatch dated the 28th
of October, was ordered to demand, in Terms the most measured, however, and the most amicable, a Communication of the Treaty recently concluded between the Courts of Madrid and Versailles, or, at least, of the Articles which might relate to the Interest of Great Britain  --  and  --  TO CONTENT HIMSELF WITH ASSURANCES, in case the Catholic King offered to give any, that the said Engagements did not contain any thing that was contrary to the Friendship which subsisted between the two Crowns, or that
was prejudicial to the Interests of Great Britain, supposing that any Difficulty was made of shewing the Treaty, p. 48. The new Ministry are now got off from the true Ground, which was the Memorial of Spanish Affairs verbatim sent from Madrid, and the Letter of Lord Bristol's of August 31, with the Enclosures; and have confined their View to the single Point of the late Treaty, or the Family Compact. Every Thing relative to the final Intentions of Spain, concerning which Lord Bristol is ordered, in Mr. Pitt's Letter, so early as July 28, to come to categorical and satisfactory Declarations, is omitted in this Demand, and Lord Bristol is ordered to confine himself to the new Treaty. This I agree with Lord Egremont, is certainly no equivocal Proof of Dependance on the good Faith of the Catholic King, in shewing him an unbounded Confidence in so important an Affair, p. 49: How merited, we have seen from what passed in the latter Months of the Negociation; and in all Probability should see more glaringly, if the whole Negociation, sincet the Accession of his present Catholic Majesty, were communicated to us. From that unbounded Confidence the new Ministry entirely lost Sight of the most offensive and hostile Matter in the Memorial of July 23, and the Papers of August 31, attacking the Dignity of the Crown of England in a manner surely far more unbecoming and insolent than that Spirit of Haughtiness and Discord, which, says M. Wall, dictated that inconsiderate Step, and which, for the Misfortune of Mankind, still reigns so much in the British Government which made in the same Instant the Declaration of War, and attacked the King of Spain's Dignity, p. 67. It is plain they were accommodating themselves at any rate tamely to become the Dupes to Spain; for all they desired, by the Dispatch of the 28th of October, was an Assurance of the Innocence of the Treaty in Question, p. 23. and they passed by every Thing else, though of the most hostile Tendency. Conscious of this, Lord Egremont, at the End of his Answer to the Conde de Fuentes, December 31, pleads guilty for himself and his Brother Ministers, to the Charge that may be exhibited against them of an intentionally facile and willing Credulity, when he says, But fortunately the Terms in which the Declaration (Fuentes's) is conceived, spare us the Regret of not having received it sooner; for it appears, at first Sight, that the Answer is not at all conformable to the Demand. We wanted to be informed, if the Court of Spain intended
to join the French, our Enemies, to make War on Great Britain; or to depart from their Neutrality? Whereas the Answer concerns one Treaty only, (all that was asked by the Dispatch of the 28th of October,) which is said to be of the 15[th] of August; carefully avoiding to say the least Word that could explain, in any manner, the Intentions of Spain towards Great Britain, or the further Engagements they may have contrasted in the present Crisis. In the Dispatch indeed of Lord Egremont to Lord Bristol, of November 19, in Answer to Lord Bristol's Letter of November 2, p. 32, the new Ministry amend their own Question, and at last demand a precise and categorical Answer from the Court of Madrid, relative to their Intention with regard to Great Britain in this critical Conjuncture, which brought on the Rupture on the 10[th] of December, and is precisely what was directed by Mr. Pitt so early as July 28. 
   I cannot pass by that other Part of Lord Egremont's Answer delivered to the Count de Fuentes December 31, in which it is said, the Embassador (of England) having addressed himself to the Minister of Spain for that Purpose, could only draw from him a Refusal, to
give a satisfactory Answer to his Majesty's just Requisitions, which he had accompanied with Terms that breathed nothing but Haughtiness, Animosity, and Menace, and which seemed so strongly to verify the Suspicions of the unamicable Disposition of the Court of
Spain, p. 49, without observing that this cannot possibly be the real State of the Fact, (though his Lordship but a few Lines before says, he will confine himself to Facts, with the most  scrupulous Exactness) for Lord Egremont receives no Answer from Lord Bristol to the Orders to make the just Requisitions contained in his two Dispatches (of the 28th of October, and 19th of November,) till the 24th of December, a Fortnight aster the Rupture, which happened on the 10th, p. 41, & 43, except what I will now state, which is far from containing the repeated and the most stinging Refusals, to give the least Satisfaction, p. 50. Extract from Lord Bristol's Letter to the Earl of Egremont, November 23, p. 37: It will not be possible for me to re-dispatch a Messenger to Englander
several Days, notwithstanding my having had another long Conference with M. Wall, at which I entered minutely into every Argument suggested to me by your Lordship. Altho' I dare not flatter myself with having gained any Ground upon the Spanish Minister, yet I never before observed his Excellency listen with greater Attention to my Discourse, than at our late Meeting. When he answered me, it was without Warmth; when he applied
to me, it was friendly; and, after long Reasonings, on both Sides, we parted with reciprocal Protestations to each other of our earnest Desire to continue in Peace.
General Wall also promised me, to acquaint his Catholic Majesty circumstantially, with what had passed between us.
   I entreat your Lordship not to think me inconsequential in what I relate: It is my Duty to mention the Result of each Interview with the Spanish Secretary of State. All I sent an Account of in my Letters of the 2d Instant, was literally what had happened at that Time; and the Change I have just hinted, when I last saw M. Wall, is equally certain. I will observe but upon one Passage more, and that is from Lord Egremont's Dispatch of November 19, because when he is drove to the Necessity of defending the Proceedings of
the present Ministry, he gives (what possibly was not his Object) the fullest Justification of Mr. Pitt, it would be a useless Condescension to, appeal so repeatedly to those ample Materials in your Excellency s Possession, for the Confutation of a Proposition so notoriously groundless, that it scarce deserves a serious Answer. The Language M. Wall
held, relative to the late Negotiation with France, as well as with regard to our Ambition and unbounded Thirst of Conquest as it consists of mere abusive Assertion, without the least Shew of Argument, deserves nothing but plain Contradiction, p. 31.
   Before I quit the Papers, it may be necessary to add, that I see nothing so alarming in the War with Spain, had it been entered into in Time, and were well conducted. I have read the Histories of both Nations, and am happy to agree with our Ministers, that Experience has shewn, that when in Contradiction to the obvious Principles of our
common Interests, that Harmony has been unhappily interrupted, Spain has always
been the greatest Sufferer, p. 21. Need I do more in Support of this Opinion, than mention the late War against the combined Forces of France and Spain, united before the French Marine was annihilated, as it now is, and at a Period, when the Navy of England had not reached its present Greatness, and irresistible Superiority? The Evidence to be drawn from these imperfect and mutilated Papers, is now fully and fairly stated. I call them imperfect and mutilated, because they have their Commencement, only from the very Point, when the long Negociation between England and Spain being become hopeless, the insolent Attempt was made by the two Branches of the House of Bourbon, then united, to force on his Majesty and the English Nation, the Concession of those inadmissable Terms, which Spain alone despaired of being able to compel us to grant. An Attempt of insiduous Perfidy, which at once proved the particular Peace, betwixt England and France to be hopeless and impracticable; for what Cessions to France could an English Administration be justified in making, while she declared herself eventually engaged to take part with Spain in a new War for Spanish Objects, totally inadmissible; from which Protest it doth not appear that either Court ever departed? The specious and false Appearances of Candour, which the Publication of Papers in such a State is meant
to convey, are as easily seen thro' and detected, as they are unfair and ungenerous. A great deal of very important Intelligence, relative to the Point in Question, is plainly withheld. The Suspicions arising from the Suppression of Evidence are, no doubt, in the Opinion of Government, more tolerable than the Conviction founded upon full Proof. Even the Particulars of the Negotiation with France are still secreted from the Public, as far as it is in the Power of our Government; lest, among other good Reasons, as it stands naturally connected with the Spanish they might, if considered together, throw too striking a Light on the Whole. The infinite Importance of what is suppressed, I do not pretend to determine; but the Papers are evidently thus partially laid before the Public by Administration, to justify, if possible, their Delay, with what Success the Public will determine. As to the Wisdom, of the written Advice, it stands already proved by the Event: but before we can enter fully into that Dispute (if there can be still a doubt) all the Materials, all the Evidence, both from Papers and Facts, on which that Advice was founded, ought, in common Justice, to be laid before the Public. From what we already know with Certainty, even from these Papers, as to what Spain had already done, not from what that Court might further intend to do, I cannot but own my Surprizes that there should be a Difference of Opinion with regard to Measures to be taken against Spain, of the highest Importance to the Honour of the Crown, and to the most essential National Interests. When 1 am told that only one noble Lord, and the late Secretary of State, of the most confidential Servants of the Crown, concurred in an Opinion so evident, so clearly deduced from such a Variety of Proofs, I cannot but imagine that there must have been
some powerful Combination, some underhand Intrigues, among Ministers of more Denominations than one, to force the Resignation of the Right Hon. Gentleman. He must long have been looked upon with an unfriendly and jealous Eye by Ministers, to whom,
it is his Honour that he was so very unlike; and who, though real Unanimity attended it in the Nation, could ill brook his postering in so high a Degree, (what they never had the least Share of) the Confidence of a discerning and enlightened People. A Point of the utmost Consequence to every Ministry, in this Kingdom. The Glories of this Gentleman's Administration, (that is, while he was allowed to guide the Measures of this Nation) and the Applauses of his grateful Country, have given him at least a due Portion of Envy, which is a certain Attendant on splendid Merit. That only two Resignations have accompanied that of the late Secretary, is no Surprize to me. 
   From these few and scanty Materials, so sparingly dealt out to the Public, I have endeavoured to give you all the Satisfaction in my Power. I could possibly have amused you more, but I have all along preferred the Desire of informing to that of entertaining you. Perhaps you had been better pleased, if I had deviated more, and had not confined myself so strictly to the Evidence of the Papers, and to Facts which will not be denied.
To conclude, Let me add to Hopes not very sanguine, very sincere and very fervent Wishes: May the most perfect Harmony, mutual Confidence, and Unanimity, which, Lord Egremont, October 28, says, p. 23, now Reign in his Majesty's Councils, for the sake of the Public, long continue! May the Expedition now sailed to the West-Indies prove, by Success, to have been timely in Preparation, adequate in Force, to the Object, whatever it may be! May our Army in Germany, (since it is still to continue there, tho'
Mr. Pitt is retired,) and the Kings of Prussia and Portugal find that Example has indeed been taken of the Spirit of the late Measures, p. 23. and that the Measures of Government
will suffer no Relaxation, p. 22. from feeble, procrastinating, and undecided Counsels, founded in Weakness and Duplicity, and, to grace the Whole, may the best-disposed Prince, that has at any Time swayed the Sceptre of Alfred, never live to want a Minister as able, and successful as Mr. Pitt.
