TO THE Earl of BUTE,
My Lord,
As ANY and various motives have concurred to give a peculiar propriety to the fond
wish I had formed of making this humble offering at the shrine of Bute. I have felt an honest indignation at all the invidious, unjust and odious applications of the story of Roger Mortimer. I absolutely disclaim the most distant allusion, and I purposely dedicate this Play to your Lordship, because history does not furnish a more striking contrast, than there is between the two ministers, in the reigns of Edward the Third, and of George the Third. I shall trace this through a variety of the most interesting particulars, secure of the satisfaction your Lordship will find by accompanying me in so pleasing a pursuit. Edward the Third was held in the most absolute slavery by his mother and her minister.
The first nobles of England were excluded from the King's councils, and the minion disposed of all places of profit and trust. The King's uncles did not retain the shadow of power and authority. They were treated with insult, and the whole royal family became not only depressed, but forced to depend upon the caprice of an insolent favourite. The young King had been victorious over the Scots, then a fierce, savage, and perfidious people, in that reign our cruel enemies, happily in this our dearest friends. On every favourable opportunity, either by the distractions in the public councils of this kingdom during a minority, or by the absence of the national troops, they had ravaged England
with fire and sword. Edward might have compelled them to accept of any terms, so glorious and decisive was the success of his arms, but Roger Mortimer, from personal motives of power and ambition, hastily concluded an ignominious peace, by which he sacrificed the triumphs of a prosperous war, and the justest claims of conquest.
It is with the highest rapture, my Lord, I now look back to that disgraceful sera, because I feel the striking contrast it makes with the halcyon days of George the Third. This excellent Prince is held in no kind of captivity. All his nobles have free access to him.
The throne is not now besieged, Court-favour not consined to one partial stream, flows in a variety of different channels, enriching this whole country. There is now the most perfect union among all the branches of the royal family. No court minion now finds it necessary, for the preservation of his own omnipotence, by the vilest insinuations, to divide either the royal, or any noble families. The King's uncle is now treated with that marked distinction which his singular merit is entitled to, both from the nation, and the throne, established by his valour in extinguishing a foul rebellion, which burst upon us from its native North, and almost overspread the land. Our Sovereign is conscious that he owes more to our great deliverer than any Prince in Europe owes to any subject; and he sets a noble example of gratitude to princes. No favourite now has trampled upon the most respectable of the English nobility, and driven them from their Sovereign's councils. No discord now rages in the kingdom, but every tongue blesses the minister who has so many ways endeared himself no less to the nobility than to the whole body of the people.
To compleat the contrast, we have now an advantageous, a glorious peace, fully adequate to all the successes, to all the glories of the war. The present internal policy of this kingdom, my Lord, is equally to be admired. Our gracious Sovereign maturely examines all matters of national importance, and no unfair or partial representation of any business, or of any of his subjects, is suffered to be made to him, nor can any character be assassinated in the dark by an unconstitutional Prime Minster. He regularly, by your advice, attends every private council of real moment, and nothing is there submitted to the arbitrary decision of one man. This happy state of things we owe to your
Lordship's unexampled care of his Majesty's youth. The important promise you made us,
that we should frequently see our Sovereign, like his great predecessor, William the Third, presiding in person at the British Treasury, has been fulfilled, to the advantage and glory of these times, and to the perfecting of that scheme of economy so earnestly recommended from the throne, and so ably carried into execution by yourself and YOUR chancellor of the exchequer, as well as so minutely by the lord steward of the houshold. Your whole council of state too is composed of men of the first abilities; the duke of Bedford; the earls of Halifax, Egremont, and Gower; the lords Henley, Mansfield, and Ligonier; Mr. George Grenville, and Mr. Fox. The business of this great empire is not however trusted to them: the most arduous and complicate parts are not only digested and prepared, but finally revised and settled, by Gilbert Elliot, Alexander Wedderburn, esqrs. Sir Henry Erskine, baronet and the Home. Another reason why I chuse your Lordship
for the subject of this dedication, is, that you are said, by former dedicators, to cultivate with success the polite arts. How sparing and penurious is this praise? Such literary economy is really odious. They ought to have gone further, and to have shewn how liberally you are pleased to reward all men of genius. Malloch and the Home have been nobly provided for. Let Churchill, or Armstrong, write like them, your lordship's classical taste will relish their works, and patronize the authors. You, my lord, are said to be not only a Patron, but a Judge, and Malloch adds, that he wishes, for the honour of our country, that this praise were not, almost exclusively, your own. I wish too, for the honour of my country, and to preserve your lordship from the contagion of a malignant envy, that you would not again give permission to a Scottish scribbler to sacrifice almost the whole body of our nobility to his itch of panegyric on you, or pay from you; and I submit, whether a future inconvenience may not result from so remarkable an instance
how certain and speedy the way to obtain the last is, by means of the first. Almost all the sciences, my lord, have at length made so great a progress in England, that we are become the objects of jealousy to the rest of Europe, but under your auspices, Botany and Tragedy have now reached the utmost height of persecution. Not only the System of Power, but the Vegetable System likewise has been compleated, by the joint labours of your lordship, and the great doctor Hill. Tragedy, under Malloch and the Home, has with us rivalled the Greek model, and united the different merits of the great moderns. The fire
of Shakespeare, and the correctness of Racine, have met in your two countrymen. One other exotic too I must: not forget: Arthur Murphy, gent. He has the additional merit of acting no less than of writing, so as to touch, in the most exquisite manner, all the fine feelings of the human frame. I have scarcely ever felt myself more forcibly affected, than by this excellent, but poor, neglected player, except a few years ago at the duchess of Queensbury's, where your lordship so frequently exhibited. In one part, which was remarkably humane and amiable, you were so great, that the general exclamation was, here you did not act. In another part you were no less perfect. I mean in the famous scene of Hamlet, where you pour fatal poison into the ear of a good unsuspecting King. If the
great names of Murphy and Bute, as players, it is no flattery to say, that you, my Lord, were not only superior, but even unrivalled by him, as well as by all, who have ever appeared on the great stage of the world. As a writer, I take Mr. Murphy rather to excel you, except in points of orthography, but as an actor, he can form no pretension to an
equality. Nature indeed, in her utmost simplicity, we admire in Mr. Murphy, but art, art characterizes your Lordship.
This too gives your lordship a claim to the dedication of this Play. You are perfect in every thing respecting the powers of ailing. Your whole mind has been formed to it. All your faculties have been directed to this important object. "While Mr. Pitt, lord Temple, and others, your cotemporaries, unmindful of such great acquirements, were only preparing themselves for the national business of parliament, and beginning to take a distinguished part in that single sphere, you, after a seven years service in the House of Peers, were become perfect in your various parts, and condescended to tread many? private stage in the highest buskins of pompous, sonorous tragedy. With what superior success I record with pleasure. Mr. Pitt and his noble brother are now both in a private station, you hold the first office of this kingdom, and enjoy, almost exclusively, the
smiles of your Sovereign. They have only the empty applause of their country. This too
they share with others; a duke of Newcastle and Devonshire; a marquis of Rockingham -an earl of Hardwick; and the two spirited young nobles, who stand so high in fame and virtue, whom England glories that she can call her own, the dukes of Grafton and Portland. These illustrious characters will ever be respected by your lordship for their ardent love of our Sovereign and of Liberty, as well as honoured by this nation, as the declared, determined, and combined enemies of despotic, insolent, contemptible favouritism. As Tragedy and Botany have thus reared their heads, give me leave to recommend to your lordship one important point respecting the Sciences and the Belles Lettres, which still remains unsettled: I mean orthography. The French Academy has fixed it for their nation; and yet a bold modern, Voltaire, has dared to deviate from their rules. He endeavours to establish a new orthography, still nearer approaching to the pronunciation. With a polite nobleman, this must bear the palm, if not of correctness, yet of grace and elegance. Some specimens of this kind in our own tongue, which your lordship has seen, have much amused me, although the deviations from the vulgar mode might not perhaps be supported with the learned arguments of that amazing French genius. Indeed, my lord, the letters, to which I allude, are so curious, that I wish for a facsimile of them, as we have of one famous genuine letter of your countryman
Archibald Bower f. They would, I am persuaded, excel all the curious manuscripts in
your university of Aberdeen, or among the immense collection of learned books of your late valuable purchase in the Argyle library. May I not therefore hope, that as the Definitive Treaty is now signed, your lordship's labours will be directed to this important point, and that we may expect to see a compleat Orthographical Dictionary, to determine the knotty point of Britain for Briton, which has of late puzzled that great writer, the great Briton himself, notwithstanding the excellence of his Scottish education? Ease and elegance will, I am persuaded, still attend your lordship, as inseparably as they have ever done, nor will you in this case be in danger of being forsaken by them, although Benedict, or, if you please, in your own botanical phrase, now he is turned Orthographer, his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many strange dishes.
I should have added, my lord, that the Play, of which I now make the humble offering, is
a Tragedy, the most grave and moral of all poems. With a happy propriety, therefore, it
comes inscribed to your lordship, the most grave, the most moral, of all men. A witty comedy I would never have offered to your lordship, nor indeed to any of your countrymen. Wit is an ignis fatuus, which bewilders and leads astray. It is the primrose path, which conducts to folly. Your lordship has never deviated into it. You have marched on with solemn dignity, keeping ever the true tragic step, and on the greatest
occasions, SO known, SO honoured at the House of Lords, exhibiting to the world what
you learned on the stage, the most pompous diction with the boldest theatrical swell, infinitely superior to all the light airs of wit or humour. The easy sock of laughing comedy you never condescended to wear. I have one thing more to urge to your lordship, as this Play is unhappily imperfect. Your lordship loves the stage: So does Mr. Murphy.
Let me intreat your lordship to assist your friend in perfecting the weak scenes of this Tragedy, and from the crude labours of Ben Johnson and others, to give us a compleat Play. It is the warmest wish of my heart, that the Earl of BUTE may speedily compleat the story of ROGER MORTIMER. I hope that your lordship will graciously condescend to undertake this arduous task, to which parts like yours are peculiarly adapted. A variety of anecdotes in real life will supersede the lease necessity of poetical fiction. To you every thing will be easy. The fifth Act of this Play will find those great talents still in full vigour, even after you have run so wonderful a career. If more important concerns, either of business or amusement, engage you too much, I beg, my lord, that you will please royally to command Mr. Murphy, as Mr. Macpherson fays you commanded him, to publish the prose-poems of Fingal and Temora. Such a work will immortalize your glory in the literary, as the Peace of Paris will in the political, world ; and I venture to prophecy, that when the name of Roger Mortimer shall be mentioned, that of Bute will follow to the latest times.
  Give me leave now, my lord, to offer my thanks as an Englishman, for your public conduct. At your accession to power, you found us a distracted, disunited nation. The late abandoned minister of the people had wickedly extended every art of corruption through all ranks of men, the senate not excepted: I speak of the late venal parliament. You, my lord, have made us an united and happy nation. Corruption started like a guilty thing, upon your summons of Mr. Fox ; nor have I since heard of a single instance of undue, unconstitutional influence exerted in the senate. I now speak of the present virtuous parliament. Your lordship too, from every foreign court, has received the most flattering testimonies of an unbounded confidence in your veracity and good faith, equal to their just sense of your transcendent abilities. I beg pardon, my lord, for having so long
detained the patriot minister of the patriot King, from the great scenes of foreign business, or the rooting out corruption at home, or the innocent employments of his leisure hours. I hope Dr. Hill and the Home will forgive me, and that the great triumvirate having at length compleated a glorious and permanent peace, may in learned ease, under the shade of their own olive, soon enjoy the full sweets of their own philosophy; for as Candide observes, cela est bien dit, mais il faut cultiver notre jardin. In your softer, more envied hours of retirement, I wish you, my lord, the most exquisite pleasures under the shade of the Cyprian myrtle. Your patriot moments will be passed under the shade of the
Scottish fir. I will no longer intrude on your lordship. The Cocoa Tree and your countrymen may be impatient to settle with you the army and the finances of this kingdom. I have only to add my congratulations on the peculiar fame you have acquired, so adequate to the wonderful acts of your administration. You are in full possession of that fame at the head of Tories and Scotsmen; but alas! my lord, the history of mankind shews how fantastic as well as transitory is fame. What an excellent moral of humility are we taught by this? It is mortifying to reflect that the meanest have their day, as well as the most eminent and illustrious. Although Mr. Pitt is still adored at the head of Whigs and Englishmen; he too will experience that.

A Letter to Samuel Johnson, 1770
WITHOUT hesitation or apology, I address myself to you, as the undoubted author of
the ministerial rhapsody that has been so industriously circulated under the titled of The False Alarm. You have ambitiously declared yourself the spitter forth of that effusion of servility and bombast. You could not have been concealed. -- Whilst the tenets it spreads
abroad might have directed us to you, as to a probable source, the strain in which they are delivered marks you decisively. But allow me, Sir, to ask you, for what class of readers your reasonings are intended? or, for whose benefit you have stalked forth from your Vocabulary, an Orator of Polysyllables? Your great friends could not, surely, exact this service from you, for their own sakes. Men who resolve without waiting for conviction, will persist: without wishing for a defence. And for the rest: of us, the rabble of England, who might allstnk into non-existence without any sensible effect on the state; we, doubtless, are either unworthy of your high instruction, or, at least, (permit us to say) not capable of profiting by it.
Believe me, Sir, the intellectual sight of ordinary freeholders is liable to be offusqued by a superfluous glare of erudition. The dimension of our understanding is not of the proper magnitude to admit of sesquipedalian documents. Our undisciplined taste is apt to be nauseated by the reduplicated evomition of unknown idioms. If you would adapt yourself to our faculties, you must sink into language of, a lower stature than hendecasyllables.
We are not skilled to estimate the weight of terms, by their literal contents.
I am ready, however, to acknowledge that your book may be well enough calculated for the region, where (as I understand) it has been most greedily devoured. A certain protuberancy of diction maybe very edifying to the maids of honour and the inflation of your periods cannot fail to find a passage into that quarter where the Erse is laid to have been the reigning dialect. It shall be my humble, but laborious province, to endeavour to reduce your lofty speculations to the level of vulgar apprehension not so much with
a view to unwind a thread of refined sophistry, of which indeed you have observed a commendable frugality; still less to investigate candid argument, of which it is not easy to discover a trace; but to develope what little meaning you may have wished to impart, by dissipating the cloud of words in which it is at present involved, and by exhibiting it
in the form in which it must destroy itself, the language of common sense.
Your experience in the construction of pamphlets should preserve you from the absurdity of deviating into ornament, or even of proceeding on your, superstructure, till you have scrupulously secured your foundation. You will permit me, therefore, at setting out, to enquire by what train of ideas you have been led to build the power of the House of Commons on the subversion of the rights of their constituents? Have you been seduced by theory? or do you tread the surer ground of precedent and facts. Instead of historical deduction, instead of the evidence of record, the opening of your discourse seems to promise us much philosophical discussion. You lament that the science of government is not better ascertained by a diligent study of the theory of man. But without any signal display of this science, you drag us through seventeen pages of languid declamation, before you even state the question on which you profess to decide. As length, however, we are gratified, at once, with your idea of the point to be contested, with your decision on the subject, and with the principle on which you found your determination, the great and PREGNANT PRINCIPLE OF POLITICAL NECESSITY. And here, Sir, I cannot help repeating a wish that you had either contrived to accommodate your expressions
to the common standard, or, at least, in your pursuit of the globose, that you
had condescended to manifest some attention to precision. - In what sense is this pregnant term, necessity to be taken, and to what is it to be referred? If you are maintaining pretensions arising from a necessity that supercedes law; a necessity of which, the persons who are to avail themselves of the plea, are to be the sole judges; a necessity
that is founded only in the emergencies of a particular crisis, and that implies a momentry annihilation of an established constitution -- your principle is indeed pregnant -- with anarchy or servitude. But if this be the necessity on which you would establish the
right of the House of Commons to disqualify by a vote, point out to us the present emergence;  --  shew us that the state would be overturned unless the Is a relative term, and at the same time disputing the correlative obligation.
You would be understood, then, to say, that the connection between expulsion and disqualification is founded on the great and pregnant principle of political necessity, because the supposition of their being unconnected leads to an absurdity.
Now (admitting for a moment the absurdity) the necessity, in this cafe, must be logical, not political. The reductio ad absurdum is the fame argument always, whether it be applied to political, moral, mathematical, or religious discussions. This position will
not choice of the Freeholders of Middlesex were counteracted. The idea is too gross to be dwelt upon. Let us proceed in quest of some more promising explication. It is your apparent intention in this passage to reduce your antagonists to the situation of defending an absurdity. You would exhibit them in the inconsistent predicament of acknowledging a right, which not be contested by any one who has but tasted of science: and I should
have thought it trifling to recur to it, if you had not referred us to this political necessity for the final decision of the debate, and if the connection of this whole passage in your pamphlet did not seem to require the explication
I am exposing. 
The words indeed, considered by themselves, and detached from what immediately follows them, may bear amore natural and obvious interpretation: but if the first acceptation I have suggested, carries with it the excess of wickedness, and the second of
folly ; that which remains behind demands a greater degree of effrontery than ought, in reason, to be imputed to any human being. Do you mean to say, that the power of disqualifying by a vote is founded on the great and pregnant principle of political necessity, because such a body as the House of Commons could not subsist, could not fulfil the end of their institution without such a power? Go back then to the first establishment of representation; trace the claims of the representative body thro'
the long records of" successive parliaments; point to the cafe where this power has been necessary to the existence of the House produce a single precedent where it has been exerted, where it has even been pretended to. It has been equally sacred from the heat of virtuous resentments in the best parliaments, from the promptness of venal prostitution in the most abandoned.
The instance in question is the single instance in our annals. And whether any accession of honour or stability, that may have accrued to the present House of Commons from this
measure, can be brought in testimony of its political necessity, may safely be left to the determination of the publick. 
You perceive, Sir, that our dispute might close here. Your principle is apparently wicked, or ridiculous, or in direct contradiction to the experience of ages. But you have bowed the
neck to more than Egyptian task- masters: and it may be curious to observe the airy progress of a system that is to be built without foundation or materials.
You rush impetuously into demonstration, and seem impatient to reduce us to an absurdity. This is readily admitted. If therefore the House of Commons have a
right to expel any one of their members, an expelled member is obliged, to relinquish his seat. He must return afresh into the world; a private man indeed, but with the undiminished rights of a private man and ceasing to be a member of their assembly,
he has escaped from a jurisdiction, which (upon your own idea) extends not beyond their walls. What now is become of your absurd and contradictory?
When you talk of an absurd right of refusing, do you refer it to the constituent body? If this be what you intend, you have, in the consistency of your logic, changed the terms of your proposition. The constituents have not as yet been introduced into the question. You have not hitherto supposed a right in the House to command the private Freeholder, but their own member, who, it is allowed, must obey. Upon expulsion he withdraws himself without contest; and the ideal absurdity vanishes. But you go on as you have begun.
You still find it necessary to shift your persons; you substitute the constituents for the member to be expelled: and you begin to discover to us, that this magical fabrick of necessity is in truth supported by the paltry shuffling principle of political legerdemain.
Hence, your motionless equipoise, your equal balance, your contrary attractions. The House command within the sphere of their activity j they command their member, who is bound to obey. A fresh writ is issued, and a new member is returned to Parliament. The
same individual, perhaps, as a man; but I repeat it, a new member. We have all the authority, indeed, of your ipse dixit, to teach us that this idea is absurd. But what weight
soever your dogmas, enforced by your own engaging manner, may carry with, them in a private circle; or even in a quarter too sacred for me to violate by inquisitive intrusion; I may yet be acquitted of presumption, if I venture to allow greater weight to the unanimous consent of the statute law of England, of the law of parliament, of custom, and
common sense. Let us bring the opposite authorities together. This, Sir, is yo<<r determination in form. Unfortunately for you, the law is not less explicit. There is nothing
alleged in your pamphlet that should prevent me from recurring to the strongest possible case's, that of a member expelled by act of Parliament, on his acceptance of a place of profit. What ensues? A fresh writ issues; another Member is required in the room of him
that is expelled; the same person is almost always returned; the Commons acknowledge the terms of their requisition to have been complied with; and the person so returned is constantly admitted as another member, in his own room.
The requisitiori in the writ is not directed to be altered in this cafe. Yet what says the statute, sufficiently apprised of the full force of that requisition? "such person shall be capable of being again elected".
If the writ, still unrepealed, nay, perhaps, necesarily existing in the full force of unalterable law, stands in direct opposition to the statute ; the former insisting on a different person from him who is permitted by the latter; we are seriously reduced to a state of motionless equipoise, and the law in this cafe becomes felo de se. But the laws of England never appear absurd, unless in the expositions of a commentator of slavish
principles. The immediate effect of the expulsion is a political annihilation. A subsequent return is not of the nature of a political resurrection. It has no reference to a former delegation; it sends the member, as a new existence, unconscious, unaccountable for former parliamentary delinquencies; his political identity is destroyed ; he is become, in
the eye of common sense, in the established idea of Parliament, in the express language of the law, to all intents and purposes, another member.
In the free ages of Greece or Rome, the wretch who should have uttered such a treason against the supremacy of the people would instantly have been overwhelmed with stones, or hurried to the precipice.
Do you conceive the full force of the word constituent ? It has the same relation to the House of Commons as Creator to creature. The rights of the people are not what the Commons have ceded to them, but what they have reserved to themselves; the privileges of the Commons are not what they have an indefeasible pretension or by arbitrary and discretionary claim, but what the people, for their own benefit, have allowed
them. Do you apprehend that the lesser barons, when, for their own convenience, they gave up their natural and positive right to a personal vote in the great council of the nation, intended to submit themselves to the condition of vassalage? that they meant to hold their franchises at the discretion of beings of their own formation.
The absolute power of the House over their members, is, for the present, admitted. But a member of parliament is a political being; the punishment, therefore, of his political delinquencies, inflicted by the political body to which he belongs, cannot extend beyond his political existence. To estimate the merits of the members of the community at large, for the purpose of deciding upon the pretensions of candidates, is too momentous a
concern to be confided to any body of delegates whatsoever. The cognizance of such matters must come before the higher tribunal of the collective body; an assembly, whose free choice enters essentially, and by a real political necessity, into the idea of a legal parliament.
No more ought any sincere and pious christian to dread the day of judgment. But if there be indeed nothing terrible in such a dismission, why do your employers shrink back at the
idea of a dissolution? Their fears give the flat contradiction to your argument, and the very design of your book is a full refutation of the doctrine you are inculcating. It were endless to pursue you thro' all the doublings and mazes of prevarication. Year next attempt is to demonstrate (in your manner) that the case of a re-elected placeman makes
directly against the general right of reelection. And in proof of this position, you refer us (as usual) to the very authority that must confound you.
The statute of 30 Ch. II. had enacted that a member refusing to take the oaths, and subscribe the test, should  -- What ? not merely be expelled, but disabled to fit in the House during that Parliament. Here then, the general right of being chosen again to a seat vacated is clearly ascertained. It required a special clause and solicitous provision to superinduce incapacity on expulsion. If, as you contend, it had been the known and indubitable law of parliament, that expulsion created incapacity, the scrupulous particularity of disabling clause would, in that cafe, have been superfluous and impertinent; it would have been sufficient to have enacted that a writ should issue for the election of a new member. Nay, the very existence of the statute is instead of a thousand arguments. Had the country party, who at that time predominated in the House, been conscious of such potency in their vote, they would not, in the heat of conflict, have waited for the prolix formality of a statute; they would not have begged the concurrence of the other House to a point, into which that House cannot, it seems, at this day, even enquire, without breach of the privileges of the Commons; they would not, lastly, have left the great business of disabling the Papists to the uncertainty of the King's assent, which nothing but the last necessity could have extorted. 
But, if you are susceptible of conviction from demonstration, the concluding words of the disabling clause must silence you for ever upon this head. The disabled member is there represented under the similitude of a person NATURALLY DEAD. It is not the genius of an act of parliament, Sir, sport in metaphor, or wanton in description. The similitude before us is pregnant with law: and it is not in the power of words to proclaim more
distinctly the doctrine I am maintaining, unless it had been engrossed in CAPITALS, that ONLY DEATH, OR THE LAW CAN INCAPACITATE. 
Having thus explored the original, I come next (in reverse of the order you have observed) to consider the copy. The act of Anne, which prescribes the expulsion of a member on his acceptance of a place of profit, has adopted the strong expressions of that of Charles, to shew in what light the dependants on the crown in parliament are viewed by the constitution; -- -but it annexed the saving clause, to shew with what religious reverence the great popular right of election is approached even by the legislature, and with whatreserve, though in the fullness of their power, they incur the appearance of intrenching upon it. But this clause would not have been inserted had expulsion simply been enacted. The statute has gone farther; and, in its zeal against placemen, has declared that they ought to be considered as naturally dead; that is, in a situation where a re-election would be an impossibility in nature. By necessary construction of a statute therefore (a thing very different from a vote of the House of Commons) the act must (without this clause) have been understood to disable. It has already been observed, that it
was the intention of this statute to express a distrust and even abhorrence of retainers to the crown in parliament. But you, Sir, who seem determined to be uniformly at variance
with the spirit of the law and the constitution, assert boldly that a place contaminates no character; that it is a badge of merit, and a just ground of confidence; that this is the idea of the Commons themselves: and, in short, that an act of parliament is expressly passed
to expel a member from his seat, because he is become more honourable, and marked as more worthy of it? This, Sir, is beyond the reach of criticism, and applies directly to our
contempt. But what are we to think of your total defection from yourself? of such a shameful revolt from principles long and strenuousy, and even honourably maintained? Your friends may pity the public abominates. Your original sentiments concerning
placemen arid pensioners are as notorious to the world as your inveteracy against the scotch. You have at length, it seems, discovered worth and dignity in the former; and are so perfectly reconciled to the latter, as to have deviated (in despite of nature) into an
attempt at humour in their defence, holding out to public ridicule the unwieldy exhibition of the gambols of a colossus! -- But the merits of Lord Bute are superabundant; and, let me add, his discernment is not of the meanest; by a well-placed pension of three hundred pounds a year he has expiated his own sins and those of his country.
Yet, surely, if it be upon such terms that you are become a pensioner, it were far better to return back to that poor but honest state, when you and the miserable Savage, on default of the pittance that should have secured your quarters at the club, were contented -- in the open air -- to growl at the moon, and Whigs, and Walpole, and the house of Brunswick. But, if the wages of prostitution, once tasted, are too delicious to be relinquished, you must, at least, be sensible, that they are not to be enjoyed but by die loss of all respect and consideration with the public. A reflection, one would think, that might have secured you from the indiscretion of attempting to impose unwelcome falshoods on the ignorant or superficial, by the mere weight of your authority. The gross and virulent insults you have
affectedly thrown out against Mr. Wilkes, (who is confessedly the favourite of the public; whose private friendships are extensive and sincere; yet of whom you chuse to assert, that he is spoken well of by no man) are not more scandalous than they are
injudicious. The greater part of the world do not appear to acquiesce in the criminality of
the charges that have been alleged against that gentleman although he has been singled out for the re-publication of a paper that had been re-published before in almost all the
journals in the kingdom, and although his servant was bribed to rob him of a poem which he had scrupulously shut up from the general eye. The poem, indeed, by the common accounts of it, is not much more defensible than the shocking vices of your employers: but the disgust naturally excited in liberal minds by indecency, is, in this instance, lost in the abhorrence of the means by which evidence was obtained against its publisher.
But it is not enough to load Mr. Wilkes with crimes. You charge the Freeholders of the first county in England with re-electing him upon the recommendation of those crimes.
I must ask you plainly, Sir, is it your intention, in this passage, to lend a lie the confidence of truth? or do you seriously believe, that even the most insignificant borough that your masters command, would adopt the interest of any person whatsoever, merely on the merit of sedition and obscenity?  -  I give you the alternative of being in-
famous or contemptible.
The freeholders of Middlesex (men of plain sense, and of an honesty that has stood unshaken against all the assaults of corruption, and all the intimidations of power) did not select Mr. Wilkes for their representative, in so distinguished a manner, in reward of the Crimes imputed to him  --  an insinuation that must rouze the indignation of every man of honour in the kingdom  --  but in acknowledgment Of substantial benefits obtained by
that gentleman to the constitution of this country; in detestation of the unjust, illegal, oppressive, and ungentlemanly means put in practice to convict him; and in order to mark to the present age and to latest posterity, that the man who encounters the attacks of
despotism with fortitude and perseverance, shall never want the avowed protection, and generous support of the great body of the people of England. But, at every step, you advance in brutal insolence. These noble spirits might, in your judgment it seems who, by parity of absurdity, might perish in their turn, with as little detriment to the state.
We are not at a loss to discover, to what quarter you are indebted for a mode of thinking and of speaking that has never before been endured in any country pretending to freedom.
It is no secret to the public, Sir, in what cabinet the expedient of a second candidate took its rise or by what abject humiliations the detested suggest or of it made his peace, and obtained readmission there; or by whose son, the first glorious opposers of this invasion
of our rights have been vilified in language too insolent to go unpunished, too ungentlemanly to be repeated; or by whose brother, the chartered freemen of England, whose rights have been confirmed to them by thirty-nine successive ratifications of the great national compact, have been authoritatively, and as it were ex officio, pronounced to be base-born. The public fees, Sir, that such ideas and such measures have flowed from
the same spring. But the things is. not altogether without example. A princely dame in Rome had her objections to the rabble; and chose to signify them in terms exactly similar
to those which you adopted. The event was, different. But in Rome, there was virtue. She suffered as a TRAITRESS. 
Admitted. If therefore the question had arisen, whether Mr. Wilkes's majority were composed of men legally possessed of freeholds of the clear annual value of forty shillings, the House would have been competent judges in the case. A partial or unjust determination of an election, however odious, is but a confined injury, limited to the parties immediately affected: but a power of creating disabilities, erected into a principle on the ground of expediency; rooted in a pretended political necessity, and of branching out into occasional incapacitations; such a power, extends to, and concludes every elector in the kingdom, and enables a wicked minister to defeat the whole constitutional
establishment of representation. The distant counties, therefore, have wifely caught the alarm; sensible that they may soon feel the oppression in their own persons, if they silently submit to a decision destructive of the rights of the freeholders of Middlesex.
What, then! were the fruits of their honest industry enjoyed by those unhappy victims who were butchered by the guards? or who perished by the hired and the pardoned ruffian? Was that door in the power of its owner, which was daringly forced open by the slaves
of power, for the purpose of throwing Mr. Wilkes into the situation from which you reproach the freeholders of Middlesex for wishing to take their representative? You are somewhat out of luck, Sir, in your exemplifications. Men may, and do, live in tolerable
comfort in arbitrary countries. But it is the birth-right of an Englishman to be conscious that he is answerable) to the laws alone for his conduct.
From the present temper of the people of this country, I am willing to draw an omen of the immortality of the liberties of England. But a time may come, when a House of
Commons may wish to arrogate to themselves, in every instance, the incommunicable right of election, and to supply the vacancies in their body (when they may chuse to fill
them up) by co-optation. , You, Sir, at least, are determined to contribute your endeavours to hasten such an event, by attempting to ridicule the apprehensions of the people, arising from experienced invasions of their rights, and by treating the yeomanry
as unable to investigate this very intricate question.
But it may be matter of some curiosity to allow your system its full extent, and to examine whether your arguments have not a tendency to annihilate the House of Lords, as well as to enslave the people: two events, indeed, which, if we may judge from
some late spirited proceedings in that House cannot be easily separated. In establishing the power of the House of Commons over their members, you consider them as an independent, unresponsible, uncontrolable assembly: dissoluble, indeed ; but, whilst
they subsist, co-ordinate with the Lords. What should hinder, then, but that your political necessity should apply with equal force to either assembly?
The public perceive, Sir, with what kind provision the poison and the antidote are joined together in nature, and how completely, in the present instance, the effect of the worst intentions is counteracted by ignorance and absurdity. Your book supplies all the materials of an answer to itself. In one place, you suppose expulsions to be very rare:
in another your argument turns upon the idea of their frequency. You tell us, at setting out, that the House cannot subsist without the power of incapacitation: In another
passage, you are at much pains to prove that this power is ineffectual to any essential purposes of the constitution, which can only be secured by the permanency of a statute.
It is your established principle, that the House have an absolute, uncontrolable power of expelling any one of their members yet, when it suits your occasions, you maintain expressly that.  This indeed, is to do business effectually: it is to interdict every candidate, and make the vote of every elector useless and dead. In the midst: of these contradictions,
there is one point in which you are consistent. You discover in every line
a rooted attachment to " the unhappy family" whom " the gloomy, sullen.
" William" drove out:  --  and, in the blindness of your zeal, or in the candor of Jacobitism, when you even mean to pay a compliment to the best of princes, you are betrayed into the detestable and traiterous insinuation, that he is the only king since the Revolution, whose character, or whose measures, have borne any resemblance to those of
the abdicated line. 
It is impossible to misunderstand you. A complete century would have left us amidst the infamies of the Second Charles; but you are habituated to the name of James, and are determined to bring us down to the æra of your abomination, the glorious Revolution. Yet, surely, the good Anne might have been excepted, for the merit of the pious purposes of her last four years.  --  But I repress myself. --  It is but too notorious, that you are not the only person who has been suffered to approach St. James's, with all the principles and prejudices of St. Germains. What better, then, was to be expected, than unheard-of exertions of unconstitutional powers, on the part of administration: and the prostitution
of some hireling pen, in the cause of passive obedience and non-resistance, but thinly veiled in their new-fangled disguise of a great and PREGNANT PRINCIPLE OF POLITICAL NECESSITY?
I am, &c &c
The Author
TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY
Sire,
I beg to throw myself at your Majesty's feet, and to supplicate that mercy and clemency which shine with such lustre among your many princely virtues.
Some former ministers, whom your Majesty, in condescension to the wishes of your people, thought proper to remove employed every wicked and deceitful art to oppress your subject, and to revenge their own personal cause on me, whom they imagined to be the principal author of bringing to the public view their ignorance, insufficiency, and treachery to your Majesty and the nation. I have been the innocent but unhappy victim of their revenge. I was forced by their injustice and violence into an exile, which I have never ceased for several years to consider as the most cruel oppression, because I no longer could be under the benign protection of your Majesty in the land of liberty.
With a heart full of zeal for the service of your Majesty, and my country, I implore, Sire, your clemency. My only hopes of pardon are founded in the great goodness and benevolence of your Majesty; and every day of freedom you may be graciously pleased to permit me the enjoyment of in my dear native land, shall give proofs of my zeal and attachment to your service.
I am, SIRE,
Your Majesty's most obedient, and dutiful subject, March 4, 1768. JOHN WILKES
TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The humble Petition of John Wilkes,
SHEWETH,
That your Petitioner, having stood forth in support of the constitutional rights of this kingdom, in opposition to a late violent administration, hath been severely prosecuted at
law, and sentenced to pay a heavy fine, and to suffer an imprisonment of twenty-two months; that the unfair methods employed to convict your petitioner have been palpable and manifest; that the petitioner has always been your Majesty's loyal subject, zealously attached to your illustrious house, and will remain the same to the end of his life; >>that he looks up to the throne only for that protection and justice, which eminently distinguish your Majesty's royal character; that your petitioner, with the greatest deference, submits the whole of his case to your Majesty's consideration, and humbly supplicates your royal clemency.
And your Petitioner, as in duty bound, shall ever pray
King's Bench Prison, JOHN WILKES
Nov, 28, 1768




