Paradise of the Negro-Slaves  -  A Dream
Soon after reading Mr. Clarkson's ingenious and pathetic essay on the slavery and commerce of the human species, the subject made so deep an impression upon my mind, that it followed me in my sleep, and produced a dream of so extraordinary a nature, that I have yielded to the importunitiess of some of my friends, by communicating it to the public, I thought I was conducted to a country, which in point of cultivation and scenery, far surpassed anything I had ever heard, or read of in my life. This country, I found, was inhabited only by negroes. They appeared cheerful and happy. Upon my approaching a beautiful grove, where a number of them were assembled for religious purposes, I perceived that once a pause in their exercises, and an appearance of general perturbation. They fixed their eyes upon me  -  while one of them, a venerable looking man, came forward, and in the name of the whole assembly, addressed me in the following language:
"excuse the panic which you have spread through this peaceful and happy company: we perceive that you are a white man -  That colour which is the emblem of innocence in every other creature of God, is to us a sign of guilt in man. The person whom you see here, were once dragged by the men of your colour from their native country, and consigned by them to labour  -  punishment  - and death.  -  we are here collected together, and enjoy an ample compensation in our present employments for all the miseries we endured on earth. We know that we are secured by the Being whom we worship, from injury and oppression. Our appearance of terror, therefore, was entirely the sudden effect of habits which have not yet been eradicated from our minds."
"Your apprehensions of danger from the site of the white man," said I, "our natural. But in me  -  you behold a friend. I have been your advocate  -  and."  -  Here, he interrupted me, and said, "is not your name  - ?" I answered in the affirmative. Upon this he ran up and embraced me in his arms, and afterwards conducted me into the midst of the assembly, where, after being introduced to the principal characters, I was seated upon a bank of moss; and the following account was delivered to me by the venerable person who first accosted me.
"The place we now occupy, is called the paradise of negro slaves. It is destined to be our place of residence `till the general judgement; after which time, we expect to be admitted into higher and more perfect degrees of happiness. Here we derive great pleasure from contemplating the infinite goodness of God, in allotting to us our full proportion of misery on earth; by which means we have escaped the punishments, to which the free and happy part of mankind to often expose themselves after death. Here we have learned to thank God, for all the afflictions are task-masters heaped upon us; inasmuch, as they were the means of our present happiness. Pain and distress are unavoidable portions of all mankind. They are the only possible avenues that can conduct them to peace and felicity. Happy are they, who partake of their proportion of both upon the earth." Here he ended.  - 
After a silence of a few minutes, a young man, who bore in his head the Mark of the wound, came up to me and asked "if I knew any thing of Mr.  - , of the Island of  - " I told him "I did not."  -  "Mr.  - ," said he, "was my master. One day, I mistook his orders, and saddled his mayor instead of his horse, which provoked him so much, that he took up in acts which laid in his yard, and with a stroke on my head dismissed me from life.
"I long to hear, whether he has repented of this unkind action. Do, sir, write to him, and tell him, his sin is not too great to be forgiven, tell him, his once miserable slave, Scipio, is not angry at him  -  he longs to bear his prayers to the offended majesty of heaven  -  and  -  when he dies  -  Scipio will apply to be one of the convoy, that shall conduct his spirit to the regions of bliss appointed for those who repent of their inequities."
Before I could reply to this speech, an old man came and sat down by my side. His goal was white as snow. With a low, but gentle voice, he thus addressed me.
"Sir, I was the slave of Mr.  - , in the Island of  -  I served him faithfully upwards of sixty years. No rising Sun ever caught me in my cabin  -  no setting sun ever sought me out of the sugar field, except on Sundays and holydays. My whole subsistence never cost my master more than forty shillings a year. Herrings and roots were my only food. One day, in the eightieth year of my age, the overseer saw me stop to rest myself against the side of the tree, where I was at work. He came up to me, and beat me, `till he could endure the fatigue and he occasioned by the blows he gave me, no longer. Nor was this all  -  he complained of me to my master, who instantly set me up at publicvendue, and sold me for two guineas to a tavern-keeper, in a distant parish. The distress I felt, in leaving my children, and grand-children (28 of whom I left on my old master's plantation) soon put an end to my existence, and land me upon these happy shores. I have now no wish to gratify but one  -  and that is to be permitted to visit my old master's family. I long to tell my master, that his wealth cannot make him happy.  -  That the sufferings of a single hour in the world of misery, for which she is preparing himself, will over balance all the pleasures he ever enjoyed in his life  -  and that for every active unnecessary severity he inflicts upon his slaves, he shall suffer tenfold in the world to come."
He had hardly finished his tail, when a decent looking woman came forward, and addressed me in the following language.  -  Sir,
"I was once the slave of Mr.  - , in the state of  - . From the healthiness of my Constitution, I was called upon to suckle my Master's eldest son. To enable me to perform this office more effectually, my own child was taken from my breast, and soon afterwards died. My affections in the first emotions of my grief, fastened themselves upon my infant master. He thrived under my care and grew up a handsome young man. Upon the death of his father, I became his property.  -  Soon after this event, he lost Pound100 at cards. To raise this money I was sold to a planter in a neighbouring state. I can never forget the anguish, with which my aged father and mother followed me to the end of the lane, when I left my master's house, and hung up on me, when they bid me farewell."
"My new master oblige me to work in the field; the consequence of which was, I caught a fever should a few weeks ended my life. Say, my friend, is my first young master still alive?  -  If he is  -  go to him, and tell him, his unkind behavior to me is upon record against him. The gentle spirits in heaven, whose happiness consists in expressions of gratitude and love, will have no fellowship with him. His soul must be melted with pity, or he can never escape the punishment which awaits the hard-hearted, equally with the impenitent, in the regions of misery."
As soon as she had finished her story, a middle-aged woman approached me, and after a low and respectful curtsey, thus addressed me.
"Sir I was born and educated in a christian family in one of the southern states of America. In the thity-third year of my age, I apply to my master to purchase my freedom. Instead of granting my request, he conveyed me by force on board of a vessel and sold me to a planter in the island of Hispaniola. Here it please God."  -  Upon pronouncing these words, she paused, and the general silence ensued.  -  All at once, the eyes of the whole assembly were turned from me, and directed towards a little white man who advanced towards them, on the opposite side of the grove, in which we were seated. His face was grave, placid, and full of benignity. In one hand he carried a subscription paper and a petition  -  in the other, he carried a small pamphlet, on the unlawfulness of the African slave-trade, and the letter directed to the King of Prussia, upon the unlawfulness of war. While I was employed in contemplating this venerable figure  -  suddenly I beheld the whole assembly running to meet him  -  the air resounded with the clapping of hands  -  and I awoke from my dream, by the noise of the general acclamation of  - 
ANTHONY BENEZET!
