AN ADDRESS TO THE MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL OF EVERY DENOMINATION IN THE UNITED STATES, UPON SUBJECTS INTERESTING TO MORALS
From the nature of your pursuits, and from your influence in society, I am encouraged to address you upon subjects of the utmost importance to the present and future happiness of your fellow-citizens, as well as to the prosperity of the United States.
Under the great diversity of opinions, you entertain in religion, you are all united in inculcating the necessity of morals. In this business you are neither catholics nor protestants -  churchmen nor dissenters. One spirit actuates you all. From the success, or failure, of your exertions in the cause of virtue, we anticipate the freedom or slavery of our country. Even the new government of the united states, from which so many advantages are expected, will neither restore order, nor establish justice among us, unless it be accompanied and supported by morality, among all classes of people. Impressed with the sense of the truth of these observations, I shall briefly point out a few of those practices, which prevail in America, which exert a pernicious influence upon morals, and thereby prepare our country for misery and slavery.
I shall begin by pointing out, in the first place, the mischievous effects of spirituous liquors upon the morals of our citizens.
   I. They render the temper peevish and passionate. They beget quarrels, and lead to profane and indecent language. They are the parents of idleness and extravagance, and the certain forerunners of poverty, and frequently of jails, wheelbarrows, and the gallows. They are likewise injurious to health and life, and kill more than the pestilence, or the sword. Our legislatures, by permitting the use of them, for the sake of the paltry duty collected from them, act as absurdly as a prince would do, who should permit the cultivation of a poisonous not, which every year carried off ten thousand of his subjects, because it yielded a revenue of thirty thousand pounds a year. These ten thousand men would produce annually by their labour, or by paying a trifling impost upon any one of the necessaries of life, twenty times that sum. In order to put an end to the desolating effects of spirituous liquors, it will be proper for our ministers to preach against, not the abuse of them only, but their use altogether. They are never necessary but in sickness: and then they are better applied to the outside, then to the inside of the body.
   II. Militia laws have an unfriendly influence upon morals, more especially where they authorize the election of the officers by the privates. The meetings of citizens for militia exercises are generally attended with intemperance in drinking, quarrelling, profane swearing, and acts of violence to the property of the persons who live near the places where those meetings are held. It is a mistake to suppose that the defense of liberty requires a well-organized militia in the time of peace.
    The United States proved in the beginning of the late war, and France has proved since, that armies of disciplines irresistible troops may be formed in a short time out of the peasants of a country. War has lately become a simple art. All that is practical in it, may be acquired in a few weeks. The most gallant exploits were performed during the late war, by men who had been but a few days in the practice of handling firearms.
   III. Fares are a Pandora's box opened twice a year, in many of the states. They are wholly unnecessary, since shops are so common in all the civilized parts of the country. They tempt to extravagance  -  gaming  -  drunkenness  -  and uncleanness. They are proper only in despotic states, where the more people are corrupted, the more readily they submit to arbitrary government.
   IV. Law-suits should be discouraged as much as possible. They are highly disreputable between persons who profess Christianity. The attendance upon courts exposes to idleness  -  drinking  -  and gaming; and the usual delays of justice seldom fail of entailing hereditary discord among neighbours. It is with in inexpressible pleasure that I have lately seen an account of a recommendation from the Presbyterian synod of New-York and Philadelphia, to all the churches under their care, to settle their disputes after the manner of the primitive christians and friends of arbitration. Blessed event in the history of mankind! may their practice spread among all sects of Christians, and may it prove a prelude of fact happy time foretold in the scriptures, and war and murder shall be no more.
   V. The licentiousness of the press is a fruitful source of the corruption of morals. Men are deterred from injuring each other, chiefly by the fear of detection or punishment. Now both of these are removed by the usual secrecy of a licentious press. Hence revenge, scandal, and falsehood are cherished and propagated in a community. By means of this engine of malice, we sometimes see not only reputation but even life, itself, taken away. The patriotic Mr. Cummins, and the amiable Dr. Hawkesworth, it is said, both died of a broken heart, a consequence of being attacked by persons, who concealed themselves behind a licentious press in London. Personal disputes in attacks in a newspaper, may be compared to duels, or to the Indian mode of fighting, according as they are carried on with, or without the names of their authors. They shew in both cases, a degree of the same spirit, which leads to open murder or private assassination. But further: the cause of liberty is greatly injured by personal publications, which are not true, or which have no connection with the public; for who believe the truth that is told of a bad man, who has been accustomed to read falsehoods published every day, of a good man? Printers who vend scurrility, would do well in considering, that the publisher of scandal, is as bad as the author of it, in the same manner that the receiver of stolen goods, is as bad as the thief.
   VI. Horse-racing and cock-fighting are unfriendly amusements to morals, and of course to the liberties of our country. They occasion idleness, fraud, gaming, and profane swearing, and harden the heart against the feelings of humanity. These vulgar sports should be forbidden by law in all christian and republican countries.
   VII. Clubs of all kinds, were the only business of the company, is feeding (for that is true name of the gratification that is simply animal) are hurtful to morals. The society and taverns were clubs are usually held, is seldom subject to much order. It exposes men to idleness, prodigality, and debt. It is in private families, only that society is innocent, or improving. Here manners are usually kept within the bounds of decency by the company of females, who generally compose a part of all private families; and manners, it is well known, have an influence upon morals.
   VIII. Amusements of every kind, on Sundays, beget habits of idleness and a love of pleasure, which extend their influence to every day of the week. In those manufacturing towns in England, where the Sundays are spent in idleness or frolicking, little or no work is ever done on the ensuing day; hence it is called St. Monday. If there were no hereafter  -  individuals and societies would be great gainers, by attending public worship every Sunday. Rest from labour in the house of God, winds up the machine of both soul and body, better than any thing else, and thereby invigorates it for the labours and duties of the ensuing week. Should I ever travel into a christian country, and wish to know whether the laws of that country were wise and just, and whether they were duly obeyed, the only question I would ask, should be "do the people spend Sunday at church, or in pleasurable entertainments at home and abroad?" the Sunday schools in England have been found extremely useful in reforming the children of poor people. Who can witness the practices of swimming, sliding and scating, which prevail so universally on Sundays, in most of the cities of the United States, and not wish for similar institutions to rescues our poor children from destruction? I shall conclude my remarks upon the subject, by declaring, that I do not wish to see any new laws made to enforce the keeping of the Sabbath. I call upon ministers of the gospel only, to increase and extend, by their influence, the pure and useful spirit of their religion. In writing through our country, we may always tell, by the appearance of the people we meet with on the road, or CF taverns, whether they enjoy the benefit of public worship, and of a vigilant and faithful ministry. Where a settlement enjoys these in estimable blessings, we generally find taverns deserted on a Sunday, and the stillness pervading the whole neighbourhood, as if nature herself had ceased from her labours, to share with man in praying her weekly homage to God for his creating goodness.
   Thus I have briefly pointed out the principal forces of vice in our country. They are all of a public nature, and affect, in a direct manner, the general interests of society. I shall now suggest a few sources of vice, which are of a domestic nature, and which indirectly affect the happiness of our country.
   I. The frequent or long absence of the master and mistress from home, by dissolving the bounds of domestic government, proves a fruitful source of vice among children and servants. To prevent in some degree, the inconveniencies which arise from the necessary absence of the heads of the family, from home, it would be a good practice to invest the eldest son or daughter, when of a suitable age, with the government of the family and to make them responsible for their conduct, upon the return of their parents. Government in a family is like an electric rod to a house. Where it is wanting a family is exposed to the attacks of every folly and vice, that come within the sphere of its attraction.
   II. Frequent and large entertainments we can domestic government, by removing children and servants too long from the eye of authority. They moreover, exposed children and servants to the temptation of eating and drinking to excess.
   III. Boys and girls should never be admitted as servants  -  into a genteel family. They are seldom instructed properly, by their masters or mistresses. Their leisure hours are moreover spent in bad company: and all the places which they pick up, are spread among the children of the family, who are generally more prone to associate with them, then with any other. Where poverty or death makes it necessary to bind out children, they should be down to those persons only, who will work with them. By these means, they will be trained to industry, and kept from idleness and vice.
   IV. Servants, both male and female should always be hired by the year, otherwise no proper government can be established over them. The impertinence and irregular conduct of servants, arise from their holding their places by two short a tenure. It would be a good law to find every person, who hired servant, without a written good character, signed by his last master, and countersigned by a magistrate. This practice would soon drive bad servants out of the civilized parts of our country and thereby prevent much evil both in families and society. How many young men and women have carried through life the sorrowful marks in their consciences or characters, of being early initiated into the mysteries of ice, by unprincipled servants of both sexes! Servants that are married, should be preferred to such as are single. Matrimony in all ranks of people lessens the temptation to vice, and furnishes fresh motives to just conduct.
   V. Apprentices should always board and lodge, if possible, with their masters and mistresses, when they are separated from their parents. Young people seldom fall into bad company in the daytime. It is in the evening, when they cease to be subject to government, that they are in the most danger of corruption: in this danger can be obviated only by subjecting all their hours to the direction of their masters and mistresses.
    I shall conclude this address, by suggesting two ministers of the gospel, a plan of the new species of federal government for the advancement of morals in the United States. But each sect appoint a representative in a general convention of christians, whose business shall be, to unite in promoting the general objects of christianity. Let no matters of faith or opinion ever be introduced into this convention, but let them be considered as badges of the sovereignty of each particular sect. To prevent all disputes, but the objects of the deliberations of this general convention be ascertained with the same accuracy, that the powers of the national government are defined in the new constitution of the United States. By this previous compact, no encroachments will ever be made by the general government, upon the principles  -  discipline  -  or habits of any one sect  -  for in the present state of human nature, the division of christians into sects, is as necessary to the existence and preservation of christianity, as a division of mankind into nations, and of nations into separate families are necessary to promote general and private happiness. By means of such an institution, christian charity will be promoted, and the discipline of the church will be strengthened  -  for I would propose, that a dismission for immorality, from anyone church, should exclude a man from every church in the ecclesiastical union. But the advantages of this christian convention will not end here. It will possess an influence over the laws of the United States. This influence will differ from that of most of the ecclesiastical associations that have existed in the world. It will be the influence of reason over the passions of men. Its objects will be morals, not principles, and the design of it will be, not to make men zealous members of any one church, but to make them  -  good neighbors  -  good husbands  -  good fathers  -  good masters  -  good servants  -  and of course good rulers and good citizens. The plan is certainly a practicable one. America has taught the nations of Europe by her example to be free, and it is to be hoped she will soon teach them to govern themselves. Let her advance one step further  -  and teach mankind, that it is possible for christians of different denominations to love each other, and to unite in the advancement of their common interests. By the gradual operation of such natural means, the kingdoms of this world are probably to become the kingdoms of the prince of righteousness and peace.
   Philadelphia, June 21, 1788.
