30. Whatever good reasons may be given for restraining money-holders from taking too high interest, may with still greater force be applied to restraining
proprietors of land from an abuse of their right by exacting exorbitant rents, they exercise a most pernicious usury, and deprive industry that is actually exerted of its due reward. By granting only short leases, they stifle and prevent the exertion of that industry which is ready at all times to spring up, were the cultivation of the soil laid open upon equitable terms.*

* For what reason is the money-holder prohibited from taking the highest interest, or premium, which he can bargain with the borrower to give? Chiefly, that he may not thus have it in his power to damp the active spirit of commerce and of industry, by levying too high a tax on the means by which it is to be exerted. Why then should not the landholder be restrained from taxing at too high a rate the means of exerting that sort of industry which is of all others the most essential to the community; and is even necessary for the salutary occupation and best condition of the greater number of its members? In restraining the interest of money, the legislatures of most countries have not feared to impose a check on the free enjoyment of the reward of industry in its most recent form; for that reward in its first accumulation, and nearest to the sources, consists always of money, to be lent out at interest, which is afterwards converted into property in land.

All other kinds of property, as that of the money-holder in his cash, of the inventor in his inventions, even that of the writer in his books, are limited and regulated, by the consideration of what is supposed to tend to the greatest public utility: why ought not then the property of the landholder in his lands, which is the most extensive and most important of all, to be submitted to restrictions of the same tendency?

Much praise has been bestowed, and not unjustly, on the advantages of that free circulation and ready commerce which is now established in most countries of Europe. It is, indeed, extremely favourable to the industry of men, and to the provision of a supply for all their wants, that whoever possesses skill, art, or diligence of any kind, may find the materials whereon to exercise his talents at a moderate price; and may bring the produce of his labour to a free market.

This freedom is enjoyed completely by every sort of mechanic, manufacturer, and artist, excepting only the cultivator of the ground, who is of all others the most essential artisan to the welfare of the community.  --  He, indeed, in many countries may now bring his produce to a free and open market, but he cannot so easily find the rude materials of his industry at a reasonable price: for he is confined in his inquiry and choice to that narrow district of country with which he is acquainted, and even to the small number of farms that may happen to fall vacant about the same time with his own: in this narrow district a monopoly is established against him in the hands of a few landholders; in this respect his situation is much inferior to that of the artisan, who can go to a
cheap market wherever it is found, and can bring his rude materials from a great distance to his home; but the cultivator must carry his home to his rude materials when he has found them.

In another more important respect, the condition of the cultivator is still worse: every other artisan, when he has purchased his rude materials, becomes sole proprietor of them for ever, and whatever skill or diligence
he bestows in improving or refining them, whatever additional value he
gives them, no other person has any right to the whole or to any part of
it. It is rarely, indeed, that the cultivator can purchase his materials on such terms ; the fields he has improved he must surrender at a fixed period, and cannot separate the improvements he has made to carry them away with him. Is he not nearly in the state of a borrower of money, who, after thirty-one years' certain possession of the sum borrowed, paying regularly a large interest, should be obliged to refund the capital, and to pay along with it whatever he had gained by the use of the money, and had not thought proper to spend in his daily subsistence?

Would it not at least be fair, that if the cultivator cannot purchase his rude materials in perpetual property, he may be permitted to carry off the additional improvement he has made; or (if that cannot be separated from the original subject) entitled to require some equivalent for its value? 
31. It is of more importance to the community, that regulations should be imposed on the proprietors of land, than on the proprietors of money; for land is the principal stock of every nation, the principal subject of industry, and that the use of which is most necessary for the happiness and due employment of every individual.

32. Nor is it less practicable to adapt regulations to the use of land than to the use of money, were the legislative body equally well inclined to impose salutary restrictions on both. The glaring abuses of the one might be as effectually prevented as those of the other; although the total exclusion of all manner of abuse from either, is not to be looked for. But that class of men in
whom the strength of every government resides, and the right of making or the power of influencing and controlling those who possess the right of making laws, have generally been borrowers of money and proprietors of
land.

33. Simple rustics are naturally averse to quit their native soil, and the narrow circuit of that neighbourhood in which their youth has been spent. Hence the unlimited right of property in land becomes a monopoly in the hands of the proprietors of every district: a monopoly which tends not less to the starving of their fellow-citizens, than a monopoly of bakers without any control or
inspection of the magistrate would do. It will not produce its effects very suddenly indeed: it is only a lingering piecemeal famine, under which the individual languishes, and the race becomes dwarfish, debilitated, and deformed.*

* The monopoly of rude materials, indispensably requisite for carrying on any branch of industry, is far more pernicious than the monopoly of manufactured commodities ready for consumption. The monopoly possessed by landholders is of the first sort, and affects the prime material of the most essential industry.

This monopoly, indeed, cannot be said to take place in any country, until the age of military suite and services be past, and the reign of law and of order well established. Till that time the landholder stands no .less in need of brave and strong men to assist and defend him, and attached to his interest, than these men stand in need of cultivable soil on which their industry may be exercised in the intervals of tumult, and from which the subsistence of their families may be procured. Each party, therefore, having a commodity to traffic, of which the other stands in need, the bargain will be made on equitable terms.

The monopoly possessed by landholders enables them to deprive the peasants not only of the due reward of industry exercised on the soil, but also of that which they may have opportunity of exercising in any other way, and on any other subject; and hence arises the most obvious interest of the landholder, in promoting manufactures.

There are districts in which the landholder's rents have been doubled within fifty years, in consequence of a branch of manufacture being introduced and flourishing, without any improvement in the mode of agriculture, or any considerable increase of the produce of the soil. Here, therefore, the landlords are great gainers, but by what industry or attention have they earned their profits? How have they contributed to the progress of this manufacture, unless by forbearing to obstruct it? and yet from the necessity under which the manufacturing poor lived, of resorting to these landholders to purchase from them the use of houses and land, for the residence of their families, they have been enabled to tax their humble industry at a very high rate, and to rob them of perhaps more than one-half of its reward.

Had the manufacturers of such districts possessed what every citizen seems entitled to have, a secure home of their own, had they enjoyed full property in their lands, would not then the reward of their industrious labour have remained entire in their own hands? 
34. What other cause than this pernicious monopoly can be assigned, why population has been so long at a stand in Europe, and does not advance with nearly the same rapidity as in America; since so much land remains in every country that may be cultivated, or improved, at little more, perhaps equal, or less expense, than the forests of the new world can be cleared? Vicinity would compensate some difference in expense, but the persons who would be inclined to bestow their labour on these European wastes, cannot hope to obtain property in them on reasonable terms.*

* What is it that in England restrains the early marriages of the poor and industrious classes of men? Alas! not the Marriage Act, but a system of institutions more difficult to be reformed; establishing in a few hands that monopoly of land by which the improvable as well as the improved value of the soil is engrossed. It is this which chiefly occasions the difficulty of their finding early and comfortable settlements in life, and so prevents the consent of parents from being given before the legal age. It is this difficulty which even after that age is passed still withholds the consent of parents, restrains the inclinations of the parties themselves, and keeps so great a number of the lower classes unmarried to their thirtieth or fortieth years, perhaps for their whole lives.
35. What other reason can be given, than the influence of this monopoly, why in countries, for many ages not thinly inhabited, nor unacquainted with the
arts of agriculture, so great a proportion of the soil should still remain barren, or at least far below that state of fertility, to which the judicious cultivation of
independent occupiers could bring it? If in any country this monopoly were abated or removed, population and agriculture would advance together gradually, perhaps rapidly; nor would they find any limit to their progress,
until every two acres of dry land, the ridges of mountains excepted, were rendered capable of maintaining a man; and until the population of that country, if it does not already exceed the mean population of Europe, were
increased perhaps five-fold.* 
* Let it be considered what regulations a colony of men settling in a small island, just sufficient to furnish them subsistence, by the aid of high cultivation, would probably establish in order to render the independent subsistence of each individual secure, and to prevent any one, or a few, from engrossing the territory, or acquiring a greater share than might be consistent with the public good? Just such regulations respecting property in land, it would be the interest of every state to establish at any period of its history. The supposed state of this colony, whose land, aided by the highest cultivation, is but just sufficient to maintain its people, is that to which every nation ought to aspire, as to its most perfect state; and to that state the progress of physical causes will bring it forward, if no political obstructions are interposed.

36. While the cultivable lands remain locked up, as it were, under the present monopoly, any considerable increase of population in a particular state, though it seems to add to the public strength, must have a pernicious influence on the relative interests of society, and the happiness of the greater number. By diminishing the wages of labour, it favours the rich, fosters their
luxury, their vanity, their arrogance; while on the other hand, it deprives the poor of some share of their just reward and necessary subsistence. While this monopoly subsists, the celibacy of the Roman Catholic clergy is far less detrimental in a political light, than it has been supposed to be. Justly might that order retort on the landholders the accusation of retarding the population
of the State.

37. When mention is made in political reasonings of the interest of any nation, and those circumstances, by which it is supposed to be injured or promoted, are canvassed, it is generally the interest of the landholders that is kept in view: nor would there be any mistake in this, if all men were admitted to claim, if they chose it, their natural share of the soil. The prevalence of this
manner of speaking and reasoning may well be construed to indicate, amid all the artificial establishments of society, a secret though confused perception of
this original right.

38. Regarding the whole wealth of the community, as belonging of right to themselves, landholders stand foremost in opposing the imposition of exorbitant taxes by the State, forgetting the exorbitancy of that taxation
which they themselves impose on the cultivators of the soil, and which the sovereign may in justice, and in the way of retaliation ought to, regulate and restrain. They clamour aloud against pensions and sinecure places, bestowed by the sovereign, not adverting that their own large incomes are indeed pensions, and salaries of sinecure offices, which they derive from the partiality of municipal law in favour of that order of men by whom its regulations are virtually enacted. The injury done to the community at large is the same, whether such unjust distribution be made by the chief magistrate, or by the
system of laws itself. The injustice proceeding from the latter will always be more permanent, and more extensive. Against the tithes of the clergy, landholders have been accustomed to complain bitterly, as the bane of agriculture, as an usurpation on their own most evident rights, as wages exacted for which little or no duty is performed. But, while the bad effects of a tithe right must be acknowledged, in checking improvement, and robbing humble industry of its due reward; the right of the landholder must be allowed to operate in the same manner, with more unlimited force. The foundation of both rights, notwithstanding prejudices on either side, is precisely the same, viz., the improvident regulations of municipal law. And if any pretensions to a higher original are advanced, those in favour of the tithe right are no doubt most plausible. If considered as the reward of duties, to be performed to the public, the incomes of the clergy, after admitting all that spleen has advanced against that order of men, must appear by far better earned. How slight indeed in themselves, and how negligently performed, are those duties which the State seems to expect at the hands of landholders, in return for their affluence?

39. The public good requires that every individual should be excited to employ his industry in increasing the public stock, or to exert his talents in the public
service, by the certainty of a due reward. Whoever enjoys any revenue, not proportioned to such industry or exertion of his own, or of his ancestors, is a freebooter, who has found means to cheat or to rob the public, and more especially the indigent of that district in which he lives. But the hereditary revenue of a great landholder is wholly independent of his industry, and secure from every danger that does not threaten the whole State. It increases also without any effort of his, and in proportion to the industry of those who cultivate the soil. In respect of their industry, therefore, it is a tattle or progressive tax of the most pernicious nature, and in respect of the landholder himself, it is a premium given to idleness, an inducement to refrain from any active useful employment, and to withhold his talents, whatever they are from the service of his country. If the circumstances in which he finds himself placed stimulate to any exertion at all, it is that insidious vigilance by which he himself is debased, and his dependents at once corrupted and oppressed.*

* It has been required of the magistrate that he should with the same assiduity apply rewards to virtue as punishment to vice. The part which he has to act in respect of these cases is very different. The natural sentiments of men are sufficient to repress smaller vices, and to encourage and reward great and striking virtues; but they are not vigorous enough to apply adequate punishment to great crimes, nor steady and uniform enough to secure due reward and regular encouragement to the common and ordinary virtues of human life. It is to great crimes, therefore, that the magistrate must apply fit punishment, and protection he must give to the ordinary virtues. Of these there is none which will stand more in need of his protection, or may be more effectually reached by his care, than industry. The cultivation of the soil is by
far the most extensive and most important branch of national industry, and in all respects most worthy of the magistrate's peculiar attention.

Every man, and every order of men, have their peculiar commodity, which they bring to market for the service of the community, and for procuring the means of their own subsistence. It would be injustice and oppression, therefore, in any one order to impose restrictions on any other, respecting the price they may demand for their peculiar commodity. This injustice, however, certain higher orders have attempted, though generally without success, to put in practice, on various occasions, against their inferiors -- against hired servants, day labourers, journeymen, and artists of various kinds -- by prescribing limits to the wages they are allowed to ask or to receive.

These lower classes of citizens have only the labour of their hands for their commodity, and if any is more than another entitled to the privileges of a free and equal market, it is surely that which may be accounted more immediately the gift of nature to each.

The community has a right, no doubt, to restrain individuals from doing aught that may be pernicious or offensive: what right it can have to compel them to exert their industry for the public service, at a regulated price, may admit of question, excepting only those cases in which the safety of the State is brought into immediate and evident danger. This will not be alleged when journeymen tailors, or even farm servants, refuse to work without an increase of wages.

40. The indirect and remote influences of this monopoly are productive of many unnatural situations and many pernicious effects, which the skill of legislature is frequently employed in vain to redress. Were this monopoly anywhere removed, and the cultivation of the soil laid open upon reasonable terms, the lowest classes of men would not be destitute of wherewithal to
maintain their decayed and infirm relations and neighbours* These charitable attentions, prompted by private affection, would be better discharged, than when they devolve on the public; and all that encouragement to idleness, that waste, and mismanagement, inseparable from poor rates, and other public institutions of this sort, would be spared. In any country were this monopoly
abolished, sumptuary laws, which might have the most salutary effects on the manners, and character, and even on the prosperity of a people, would not be
politically absurd and pernicious, as in the present state of Europe they must be confessed to be.* In a country where the opportunities of exercising a
natural employment, and finding an easy subsistence; were thus laid open to all, the temptations to theft and other violations of property would be very much diminished; nor could it be thought necessary to restrain such crimes by the unnatural severity of capital punishments.

In such a country no suspicion could arise, no surmise would be listened to, that the invention of machines for facilitating mechanical labour, could ever
be pernicious to the common people, or adverse to the prosperity of the State. The plough itself is the first machine against which any imputation of this kind
could be admitted, and the time might indeed come when such imputation would be just.
* England virtually acknowledges, by the system of her poor laws, that right of common occupation of the territory of the State which belongs to every individual citizen, and has only varied, perhaps mistaken, the natural means of rendering that right effectual.

It has been common of late to complain of, and to traduce, this the most generous and the most respectable establishment of which the jurisprudence of nations can boast. It is the monopoly of landholders that renders such an establishment necessary; it is their discontent that aggravates the complaints against it. All men who can regard the interests of the poor, and of the landholders, with an impartial eye, will perceive that it is not less just than generous, and will find reason to  think that it has proved highly beneficial to England, in respect of the spirit of her people.

The abuses which may have crept into this respectable system of laws, ought not to be alleged against its utility, for even in the most perverted state of the institution the abuses are fully compensated by equivalent advantages ; and that they are not in a great measure rectified and removed is the fault of those only whose interest and whose duty require them to attend to this care.

Even while they subsist, the chief abuses of the poor laws tend more to the advantage of the poor than of the rich; and of all permanent institutions, there is no other, perhaps, of which this can be affirmed.

No regulation could tend more effectually to promote a reduction of poor rates than the establishment of certain branches of a progressive Agrarian law; and it might deserve consideration, whether other methods of reducing these rates, which are attempted, and which may be supposed by the poor themselves to bear hard on the freedom of their condition, ought not to be accompanied with some establishment of that nature; which, whilst it might contribute effectually to alleviate the burden of the rates, would tend, at the same time, to convert this class of men into a new source of national wealth and of increasing force.

The great amount of the poor rates is justly imputed to this, that, whilst young and healthy, the lower classes of labourers and servants do not save their wages as they might, for the assistance of their old age. The reason why they do not save for that purpose, is supposed to be the assurance they have of being maintained by the parish when they come to stand in need of it. Another reason might be given: they do not save, because they see no probable view of obtaining by such saving a comfortable settlement, in which they may spend their old age with their families around them. Almost all of them, it may be believed, would aim at taking small farms, were the opportunities frequent, and the terms easy. Perhaps no better reason can be given for the great increase of poor rates in England, since the reign of Charles II. (while in Wales, they remain almost the same) than the increase of manufactures and the diminished number of small farms.
* Sumptuary laws have been frequently turned into ridicule, and not
unjustly, as pretending to maintain an impracticable simplicity, and an
unnecessary austerity of manners, among the great body of citizens; but
they deserve a very different estimation, if considered as means of directing the public industry to those exertions which may be productive of the
most extensive utility, and most valuable enjoyments to the community
at large.

If those persons who spend their days in the manufactures of velvet
and of lace could be induced to employ the same industry in raising
grain, potatoes, and flax, would they not, by increasing the plenty of these
necessary commodities, augment the real accommodation of a very
numerous class of citizens? And would not the happiness thence arising
more than compensate the scarcity of those frivolous refinements which
may be required for the gratification of a few?

Why should it be necessary to restrain the industry which ministers
to luxury? Because the industry which is productive of essential plenty
is restrained. If the cultivation of the fields was laid open on reason-
able terms, would not the imposition of taxes on arts and manufactures,
subservient to luxury, tend to encourage the increase of useful commodities, fit for general consumption? 

41. That legislature which is not willing, or must not venture to remove this monopoly from the lands of the State, owes it in justice and in tenderness to the persons born under its protection, that emigration at least should be free; or rather, that it should be encouraged and facilitated, to all who desire to remove into countries, less fully settled, in search of their natural rights, and most salutary occupation. This may indeed seem to impair the national strength, by diminution of numbers, and it will undoubtedly affect the interest of the higher ranks; but by raising the wages of labour, it must increase the prosperity of the lower and more numerous ranks.* To increase the prosperity and the happiness of the greater number is the primary object of government, and the increase of national happiness must be the increase of national strength. Besides that the equilibrium of happiness between the old country
and the new would be found, long before any considerable diminution of numbers had taken place in the former. Is it not the duty then, and perhaps also the interest, of every legislature in the west of Europe, to promote the emigration of its less opulent subjects, until the condition of the lower classes of men at home be rendered nearly as comfortable as the condition of the same classes in the new settlements of North America?

* To a wise and benevolent legislature it can never appear that the free
course of emigration could prove detrimental to the community over
which that legislature presides. For what are the effects of a free and
a brisk emigration? It operates in two ways, on two different classes of
men. It betters the circumstances of all those who derive their subsistence from the produce of their labour. It impairs the circumstances of all those who are supported by a tax or impost, collected from the labour of other people. It betters, therefore, the circumstances of nine millions eight hundred thousand out of ten millions of people; it impairs the circumstances of one hundred thousand; and to a hundred thousand persons, who live partly on the produce of their own labour, and partly on a tax collected from others, the effect is indifferent.

Emigration is part of the plan pursued by nature in peopling the earth;
and laws directed to oppose or restrain it may be suspected of the same
absurd and unnatural tendency as laws for restraining population itself.

That much of the dissipation and profligacy of the poor arises from their not having a proper object of saving offered to their hopes, was surely
the opinion of those who framed an excellent bill which, in 1773, passed
through the House of Commons, for inviting the poor to set apart money,
for the purchase of annuities, in their respective parishes and townships.
An annuity may be a very proper object for the unmarried, and those
who purpose to have none but themselves to care for; but the natural
object of every young peasant is a small farm on which he may settle
with the companion of his affections, and raise a family of his own; for
this object, if it appears attainable, far the greater number of them will
work hard and save with economy.
42. Perhaps no government can claim to itself the praise of having attended with the same impartial care, to the interests of the lower, as of the higher classes of men. Those who are employed in cultivating the soil are placed below the regard of men in higher stations of public dignity and trust; nor are their sufferings and wrongs obtruded on every eye, like the misery of the
begging poor. They themselves are not much accustomed to reflection; they submit in most countries to their hard fate, as to the laws of nature, nor are they skilled, when severer oppression has at any time awaked them to a sense of the injustice they suffer, in making known their feelings and their complaints to others.

But if the intelligent, and the friends of mankind, will take some pains to inquire into the nature and extent of that oppression, under which the industrious peasants groan in secret, and the force of that exorbitant mono-
poly, from whence their grievances proceed; and if such men will employ the talents which nature hath given them, in explaining these grievances, and the rigour of that monopoly, to the whole world,  --  Europe, enlightened Europe, will not be able to endure it much longer; and the subversion  --  nay, even the abatement  --  of this monopoly, with the abuses flowing from it, may well deserve to be accounted the best, and most valuable fruit of all her refinements and speculations.

43. If it be indeed possible to accomplish any great improvement in the state of human affairs, and to unite the essential equality of a rude state, with the order, refinements, and accommodations of cultivated ages, such improvement is not so likely to be brought about by any means, as by a just and enlightened policy respecting property in land. It is a subject intimately connected with the proper occupation and the comfortable subsistence of men; that is, with their virtue and their happiness. It is of a real substantial nature, on which the regulations of law may be made to operate with
efficacy, and even with precision.

44. So powerful and salutary might the good effects of such an enlightened policy prove, so beneficial such a restoration of the claims of nature and the general birthrights of mankind, that it might alone suffice to renovate the strength of nations, exhausted by civil war, or by great and unsuccessful enterprises; and even in the most flourishing states, it might give rise to a new era of prosperity, surpassing all example, and all expectation that may reasonably be founded on any other means of improvement.

PART II
Section I
Of Circumstances and Occasions favourable to a complete Reformation of the Laws respecting Property in Land, by the sovereign or legislative power.
45. IF, indeed, we consider only how far the present a state of property in land, even in the most flourishing and best governed nations of Europe, is removed from that more equitable and advantageous system, which tends to establish in every country the greatest number of independent freehold cultivators that
the territory of the State can admit, we may almost be led to despair, that any great progress can be made towards so remote an improvement, however justly, and however much it may be desired.  --  On the other hand, the actual system of landed property in the West of Europe is greatly changed, and in some respects greatly improved, from what it has formerly been. It has varied
its form, with the prevailing character of successive ages;* it has been accommodated to the rude simplicity of the more ancient times, to the feudal chivalry of the middle centuries, and to the increasing industry and cultivation of later more tranquil periods: it may now therefore be expected to receive a new modification, from the genius and maxims of a commercial age, to which it is too manifest that the latest establishment of landed property is by no means adapted, and that from this incongruity the most pernicious and most flagrant oppressions arise.

That free discussion which every subject now receives gives reason to hope that truth and utility will always triumph, however slowly; and various examples may be offered to confirm these hopes. In politics, in agriculture, in commerce, many errors have been rectified in theory, and even the practice in some, though not in an equal degree, reformed. And shall it be reckoned, then, that in this, the most important of all temporal concerns to the greatest number of mankind, the most pernicious errors will be suffered to remain still unrefuted, or if not unrefuted still unreformed? It is not permitted to the
friends of mankind to despair of aught which may tend to improve the general happiness of their species, any more than it is consistent with a magnanimous and genuine patriotism ever to despair of the safety of our country.

There have not been wanting in former times, nor will there fail hereafter to arise in the course of human affairs, occasions, conjunctures, and situations, in which a new and perfect system of property in land might be completely established at once;  --  other conjunctures, other situations of much more frequent occurrence, are favourable, in a greater or a less degree, to partial reformation, and progressive improvement of the ancient system; and
in many cases where public care cannot be effectually applied, the beneficence and even the interest of particular persons, well directed, may be made to produce no inconsiderable effects, and to furnish examples of that which the rulers of mankind ought to aim at producing in a large extent.

* In the progress of the European system of landed property, three stages may be distinguished  --  the domestic, the feudal, and the commercial. In the first, the condition of the cultivator was secured from any great oppression, by the affectionate sympathy of the chief of his clan.
In the second, it was still secured, and almost as effectually secured, by that need which his lord had of attachment, assistance, and support, in the frequent military enterprises and dangers in which he was engaged. But in the commercial state there is no natural check which may establish the security of the cultivator; and his lord has hardly any obvious interest but to squeeze his industry as much as he can. It remains, therefore, for the legislatures of different countries to establish some control for protecting the essential interests of their common people. It is an object which deserves, and will reward, their care. In the dark and disorderly ages the oppression exercised over the cultivators could not be reduced to a system. Their landlords depended on their assistance and military services, and would not, therefore, hazard the diminution of their attachment. If at any time the landlord endeavoured to exact more than they were inclined to give, means of concealment and evasion were not wanting, by which his rapacity might be effectually eluded.

But in the present times there is no reciprocal dependence, and all means of concealment and evasion are rendered by the order of our laws uncertain, or, indeed, vain. In those disorderly times, whatever oppression, or chance of oppression, the cultivators of the field were exposed to, they saw their landlords exposed to others, perhaps greater and more frequent; there was common to both an uncertainty in the possession of their just rights; and to compensate this, a chance of obtaining by address somewhat beyond these
rights. In the present times, these common chances are removed by the
protection of established government. The rights of the higher orders are rendered perfectly secure, while those of the cultivators are laid open to their oppressions. 
46. Conquering princes, and great revolutions effected by the prevailing force of arms, have not often made their appearance on the theatre of the world in modern times; but the longer that interval which has elapsed is, the greater probability there seems to be, that some new phenomena of this interesting sort, are about to be presented to the nations of the earth. 
At the head of his victorious army, a conquering monarch has it in his power, no doubt, to re-establish in the subjected state, the inherent rights of mankind, and the system of natural justice, with regard to the property of the soil. He may even perceive it to be in all probability the best security of his new acquisitions, and certainly the best foundation of his claim to immortal
renown. It were an object, and a pretext which might even in the eye of reason and philosophy almost justify the ambitious desire of conquest in the
breast of an heroic prince; or if it may not avail so far, no other pretext whatever can be admitted to do so.*

In proportion as the true principles of property in land are inquired into, canvassed, and established in theory, it becomes less improbable that heroes and conquerors, hitherto esteemed the scourges of mankind, may be led to adopt such a salutary reformation of landed property for their object; and in the same proportion it will become more easy for them to make such
magnanimous and benevolent intentions generally understood, and to engage the concurrence and good wishes of all men in their accomplishment.

* The illustrious situation of a monarch, placed at the head of victorious armies, might well inspire with generous sentiments any mind not ignobly formed, and waken a magnanimous desire of promoting the general welfare of mankind. In this manner it has operated, even on the breasts of men, numbered with barbarians, whose names and characters can with difficulty be rescued from the obscurity of Gothic annals (see History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. iii., p. 250). To save from oblivion such authentic examples of true heroism is one of the most pleasing tasks which a historian can have to perform: to record them for the instruction of the great and powerful, in the pages of a work which may be long and often revolved, is one of the most essential services that can be rendered to mankind.

47. The establishment of new colonies, sent forth from the civilized and populous nations of Europe, may be supposed frequently to take place hereafter. The practice seems only in its commencement, and the mistakes incident to first trials are not yet corrected. Immense tracts of vacant or half-peopled countries, both maritime and inland, still invite emigrants and planters from every quarter. The southern regions of Africa and America, the Banks of the River of the Amazons, and the whole Continent of New Holland have scarcely yet received the first settlements of any race of men by whom they may be cultivated and filled. Siberia alone, it is thought, might contain the whole inhabitants of Europe more at ease than in their present habitations. Princes, instead of imprisoning their subjects, may come to perceive that a well regulated exportation of men, as of any other commodity,
tends to secure and to increase the domestic produce.

Even Britain will no doubt find inviting occasions (and just now perhaps has them) of sending forth new colonies, on better digested plans, with happier
omens, Et qua fuerint minus obvia Graiis.

In every such settlement there is opportunity of establishing the just and natural system of property in land, in the most advantageous form. The fundamental laws of such a colony ought to ascertain, in precise and explicit terms, the joint property of the whole community in the whole soil  --  a right which in that situation of their affairs will be easily comprehended by all. They ought, further, to ascertain the permanent and indefeasible nature of this right, which no possession of individuals, nor any industry by them applied to any portion of the soil, can ever cancel or impair.

However extensive the tract of country may then be in proportion to the number of the first settlers, general rules should even then be established, having respect to a future period when the whole territory may be found
too scanty for its multiplied inhabitants. By such precautions, occasionally enforced by practical examples, it seems not impossible to prevent the formation of those erroneous opinions of private right, and those habits of possession, which in countries long settled prevent the greater number of citizens from knowing or desiring to claim their natural rights in this most
important point, and which would produce the most violent opposition to their just claims, if at any time they were advanced.

48. Whatever inclination a wise and benevolent sovereign may have, to communicate to all his subjects that prosperity which the reformation of property in land seems capable of diffusing, it may appear in most cases
too hazardous for the public peace, and the security of his throne, to attempt the establishment of a wise and equitable system at once, and in the whole extent of his dominions; yet in some instances a fair opportunity is given, of making a complete change in the landed property of certain subordinate states, which, though held in absolute dependence by the sovereign, are not
incorporated with, but considered as essentially distinct from, the great body of his dominions  --  so distinct, that no innovation in the smaller realm, is likely to give any alarm, or create any jealous discontent in the other.

Such is the subjection of Courland to the throne of Russia; such perhaps the dependence of Milan on the House of Austria; of Corsica on France, and of Minorca on Britain; not to mention all those dependent states which Britain and other European nations have brought under their yoke on the Continent of Asia, and in the islands of the East.

49. Great monarchs sometimes arise, who, having confirmed the authority of an absolute sovereignty by the vigour of their natural talents, and by unremitting application to the cares and occupations of their royal office, have attained such an ascendant over all ranks of their people, that without hazard they might avow themselves the patrons of the multitude, and supporters
of natural justice, in opposition to all the confederated force of the powerful and the rich. Europe sees at least one prince, to whose magnanimity and talents a complete and total reformation of the system of landed property
in his dominions might be thought no unequal task, and to whose benevolent zeal for the general good of his people the idea of such a reformation might present itself as no chimerical project. In looking back through the records of modern ages, it is difficult to fix on another prince equally capable of conceiving so sublime a scheme, and of prosecuting the measures requisite for
carrying it into execution; unless, perhaps, that father of his people, who wished only to live, that he might convince the French nation how much he loved them as his children, and who hoped to see the day when every
householder throughout his dominions should put a fowl into his pot on Sunday. Had the reign of this humane prince, to whom the condition of the lower classes was familiarly known, been prolonged in peace, he might probably have bestowed more particular attention on the means by which his paternal wishes were to be realized; the talents of his faithful minister would have been exerted in such schemes, with still greater alacrity, and perhaps with greater skill, than in those warlike preparations which busied the last years of his master's reign; and the effects due to the joint endeavours of
such a sovereign and such a minister must have followed.

Many princes who might succeed perhaps in carrying such schemes into execution, may not be endowed with that magnanimous and comprehensive turn of mind, without which they cannot be formed; or are deficient in that courage, without which no trial will be attempted. Yet, if any plan may be concerted, by which it seems not unlikely that the happiness of mankind might be increased two-fold at once, where is the monarch who would not eagerly engage in such attempts, at whatever risk? Where, indeed, is that monarch who enjoys so much felicity himself in the possession of a throne, that in such a cause, with the hope of accomplishing so great an advantage to his people, and obtaining such distinguished glory for himself, he ought not to risk
it all?
Mortemque pro laude pacisci.
Section II
Of Circumstances and Occasions favourable to a partial Reformation of the Laws respecting Property in Land, by the sovereign or legislative power.
50. MANY schemes of innovation may be thought of, which, without amounting to a complete change, or the establishment of the best system of
property in land, might yet recommend themselves to the attention of absolute monarchs, as being more suddenly, and therefore more safely, to be carried into execution, than any total reformation can be, and productive of very beneficial effects, though not of the best.

Such as, 1st. To fix the rent of every farm for ever, and limit the duration of all leases to a single life of the tenant; that is, to convert leases into
benefices.

2ndly. To make the duration of every lease perpetual, so long as the tenant may choose to make an addition of one-twelfth, or some other just pro-
portion of the present rent, at the end of every thirty years.

3rdly. To make the duration of every lease perpetual, reserving to the landlord a stated proportion of the annual produce, suppose one-fifth to be paid
in the staple commodity of the country; the amount of this produce to be ascertained by a jury, once in thirty years, if the landlord require
it, or in twenty, if the tenant chooses.
4thly. To convert all farms into freeholds, with a reservation of the present rent to the landlord, transferring at the same time all land taxes and all public burdens whatever, with all their future augmentations from the landlord, to the new freeholders, formerly his tenants.

5thly. To establish a sort of jubilee, with regard to property in land, by enacting, that at the expiration of fifty years after the last purchase of an
estate in land, every farm shall become freehold in the hands of the farmer, with reservation of the average rent of the last seven years to the landlord.

These are examples only; many other schemes might be easily devised. By the 1st, the landlord receives power in exchange for gain, and by the 4th, a lucrative exemption, in place of the uncertain increase of a racked rent. By the 3rd, the claims of both parties are compromised in a manner scarcely less favourable to the landlord, and far less oppressive to the cultivator, than the conditions of leases for a limited time commonly are. By the 2nd, the cultivator, and by the 5 th, the landlord, would be excited to a diligent improvement of the fertility of the soil.

In all cases, the farms thus converted into freehold should be made subject at the same time to the laws of gavel-kind, until they are subdivided into allotments of less than forty acres, or whatever other standard may be fixed upon as best suited to the state of the community and the nature of the soil.

51. It has sometimes happened, though too rarely, that all ranks and orders of men in a state, forgetting for a while their subordinate and particular interests, are disposed with concurring wishes to seek for, and to adopt whatever schemes may contribute most effectually to the public good, and may become the foundations of lasting order and prosperity. Such seems to have been the
prevailing disposition of the Romans, when the laws of the twelve tables were enacted; such nearly that of Athens, when Solon was intrusted by his fellow citizens to compose a body of laws for their country; and such that spirit which ought to pervade, and has in general pervaded every community of men, while contending for independence, against the efforts of a more powerful state.

Should ever any happy concurrence of disposing causes produce such a temporary disposition in any of the Western nations of Europe; could the legislature, prompted by enlightened zeal for the universal good, set at naught the discontents which might arise in any particular class, and remove with ease all opposition made to their generous purposes; in this fortunate situation, it might occur to them, perhaps, that a just regulation of property in land is, of all those arrangements which the present moment could give opportunity of establishing, the most essential for diffusing prosperity and independence among the body of the people.

Pursuing this idea, biassed by no influence, awed by no faction, they might be led to enact a law, by which every person inclined to employ himself in cultivating the earth for his own subsistence, and that of his family, should be entitled to claim in full property a reasonable share of the soil of his country; without prejudice, however, to the just rights of any other persons who may have previously bestowed their industry in cultivating and improving the same spot.

Such a law might, from the nature of its operation, be not unfitly denominated a progressive Agrarian, and might be comprised in the following articles, or others of similar effect:

I. That every citizen, aged twenty-one years or upwards, may, if not already in possession of land, be entitled to claim from the public a certain portion, not exceeding forty acres, to be assigned him in perpetuity, for cultivation and residence, in the manner and under the conditions hereafter
specified.

II. That the claimant shall have right to choose the situation of his allotment, on any farm, freehold, or uncultivated common, within his own parish, if the same be not excepted by the other provisions of this law. If there be no unexcepted land in his own parish, he shall have right to choose in any of the parishes contiguous to his own; and if in these there be no unexcepted land, he shall have right to choose throughout the whole district or county.

III. This allotment shall be set apart, and its landmarks fixed by the magistrate, with the aid of an assize, or of arbitrators chosen by the parties.
It shall be marked out, in the manner most convenient to both the old and the new occupiers; it shall approach to a square, or some other compact form; one of its sides shall run along the boundary of the old farm; and it shall
have communication with some road already patent.  --  None of these circumstances to be departed from without the consent of both parties.

IV. The ground thus set apart shall be submitted to the cognizance of an assize, or of arbitrators chosen by the parties, who shall determine what
reserved perpetual rent the claimant must pay to the landlord, and what temporary rent to the former tenant (if any), in compensation of their rights.

V. The following farms are to be exempted from all such claims.  --  Every farm from which, if the allotment claimed is taken away, less than forty acres will remain to the first tenant.  --  The farm or park belonging to the lord of the manor, the same bearing a regulated proportion only to the extent of his estate.  --  Every farm of whatever extent that has not been fifteen years occupied by the present tenant.  --  Every farm whose arable ground has been diminished one-half by claims founded on this law, shall be exempted for twenty years to come, if the tenant so desire.  --  All farms of barren ground taken for the sake of improvement, under such forms and regulations as may
prevent the collusive evasion of this law.

VI. The person thus acquiring property in land shall continue to reside upon his farm. He shall have right to transmit it to his heirs or assignees in full property, or under a reserved rent, but shall not have, nor transmit the right of alienating it with reversion, that is of letting the whole, or any part of it in lease.  --  If he sells to another, who shall not reside upon it, but annex it to some other farm, one-tenth part of the price, or of the reserved rent, shall belong to the public.
