INTRODUCTION
THE municipal laws of every country are not only observed as a rule of conduct, but by the bulk of the people they are regarded as the standard of right and of wrong, in all matters to which their regulations are extended.
In this prejudice, however natural to the crowd, and however salutary it may be deemed, men of enlarged and inquisitive minds are bound by no ties to acquiesce without inquiry.

Property is one of the principal objects of municipal law, and that to which its regulations are applied with greatest efficacy and precision. With respect to property in movables, great uniformity takes place in the laws of almost all nations; they differ only as being more or less extended to details, comprehending the diversity of commercial transactions; and this branch of jurisprudence may be said to have almost attained to its ultimate maturity and perfection.

But with respect to property in land, different principles have been adopted by different nations in different ages; and there is no reason why that system,
which now prevails in Europe, and which is derived from an age, not deserving to be extolled for legislative wisdom, or regard to the equal rights of men, should be supposed to excel any system that has taken place elsewhere, or to be in itself already advanced beyond the capacity of improvement, or the need of reformation.

It is to a free and speculative disquisition, concerning the foundation of this right of property in land, and concerning those modifications, by which it may be rendered in the highest degree beneficial to all ranks of men, that the author of these pages wishes to call the attention of the learned, the ingenious, and the friends of mankind.

It can give him no surprise, if the opinions he has advanced on a topic of discussion, so new, and so interesting to all, shall meet with the approbation of a few only. Were they now for the first time to be presented abruptly to his own mind, he believes that they would startle his first thoughts, and perhaps might be rejected on a transient view. But the leading principles of that system, which he now holds, respecting property in land, have been coeval in his mind with the free exercise of his thoughts in speculative inquiries; they have recurred often, they have been gradually unfolded, and for some years past he has been accustomed to review them frequently, almost in their present form, with still increasing approbation.

All that he would request in their favour (and the candid will readily grant this) is, that they may not be rejected on a first disgust, and that those who cannot adopt the opinions here advanced may at least bestow some pains in ascertaining their own. These are the opinions of one individual, thinking freely, and for himself; they are erroneous perhaps and visionary; their singularity may well authorize a suspicion that they are so, and this suspicion ought to have kept them back from the public eye, but for the hope of exciting
others to enter into the same train of inquiry, and no longer, in a matter of the first importance to the interests of society, implicitly to acquiesce in traditionary doctrines, never yet submitted to examination.

Free inquiry, however it may give birth to vain theories and chimerical projects, has never in any department been productive of essential detriment to the true interests of mankind. What undesirable consequences have always arisen from the stagnation of inquiry, and from silent acquiescence, even in establishments that are beneficial, and in opinions that are true, the history of mankind bears witness in every age.

It is natural to the mind, when new ideas arise on important subjects, to open itself with fondness to the pleasing impression which they make. Yielding to this seducing enthusiasm, the author has been led to speak with freedom of great changes, suddenly to be accomplished, as practicable in some cases, and to be desired in many. Yet is he well aware that great changes, suddenly accomplished, are always pregnant with danger, and with evil, and ought on almost no occasion whatever to be desired, or brought forward by the friends of mankind. Partial reformation, gradual progressive innovation, may produce every advantage which the most important and sudden changes can promise, yet without incurring those dreadful hazards, and those inevitable evils, with which great and sudden changes are still attended.

With the greatest satisfaction of mind he avows his persuasion, that were great and important innovations respecting property in land as practicable and safe, as they are difficult and full of danger, there is no country under the sun which stands less in need of such reformation than England. Although indeed the principles of jurisprudence, respecting property in land, which the laws of England recognize, are derived from the same source, and partake of the same absurd and pernicious nature with those maxims which prevail almost everywhere on the continent of Europe, yet such has been the generosity of English landholders, such their equitable conduct towards their tenants and dependants, and such the manly spirit of the lower classes, fostered by a sense
of political rights, that in England the comfortable independence of the farmer and actual cultivator of the soil, is established on as secure a footing as the most refined system of property in land deduced from the genuine principles of public good and natural right can propose to render effectual and permanent. It is to be regretted only that this comfortable independence which the farmers enjoy cannot be extended to a still greater proportion of the community. English landholders and English farmers are superior in all respects to the same class of men in other countries: in their manly vigour, their plain good sense, their humane virtues, consists the true basis of our national pre-eminence. Their blood circulates in every rank of society, their domestic manners have given the tone to the English character as displayed in all the various departments of business and enterprize; nor can any wish be formed more favourable to the prosperity of the public, than that the numbers of this class of men may be increased.

To increase the number of landholders by advancing farmers to that more independent situation, can never be made the object of legislative care in this country, as it might in the absolute monarchies of the continent; but to increase the number of farmers, by favouring the advancement of day labourers and manufacturers to the more animating and manly occupation of cultivating a small farm for their own account, is an object very similar to many branches of enlightened policy which the British legislature (more than any other) has pursued with attention and success.

To the worthy and humane English landholders, and more particularly to those who of late years have voluntarily granted to their tenants an abatement of rent, this short Essay is inscribed by the Author, as to men whom he regards with high esteem, and from whom he may hope that his speculations, should they ever come to their knowledge, would meet with no unfavourable reception. Why should he not flatter himself with this hope, however seemingly vain, since uninformed by theoretical reasonings, and prompted only by the innate candour and humanity of their own minds, these respectable landholders, truly worthy of their station and of their trust, have habitually acted in conformity to those principles of public good and natural right which he is desirous to elucidate and establish.
PART I
Section I
Of the Right of Property in Land as derived from the Law of Nature
1. ALL Right of property is founded either in occupancy or labour. The earth having been given to mankind in common occupancy, each individual seems to have by nature a right to possess and cultivate an equal share. This right is little different from that which he has to the free use of the open air and running water; though not so indispensably requisite at short intervals for his actual existence, it is not less essential to the welfare and right state of his life through all its progressive stages.*

* The bulk of mankind in every country are ignorant of the difference
between their own laws and those of other nations; too ignorant to
understand, and to value aright what is truly excellent in their own
code, or to perceive what improvements it may still admit, and what
innovations ought to be desired. In no article are they more ignorant
than in respect to property in land, the established rules of which are in every country accounted permanent and immutable, as being fixed by
the destination of nature.

In most countries the proprietors of lend will ever retain a more than
equitable authority over those who cultivate their fields, and not unfortunately for both, did they but remember that the situation of a proprietor is more allied to that of a prince than that of a merchant, and requires some degree of those generous sentiments, and that benign demeanour, which ought to adorn the highest station.

It cannot be denied, that all over Europe, those who are employed in cultivating the soil lead a very wretched life; and that it seems very practicable to render their condition much better than it is, without rendering that of their landlords and superiors any worse. It cannot be doubted that much more beneficial establishments of property in land than those which obtain in Europe, or almost any that are known to have obtained elsewhere, may be devised, and are capable of being instituted, and receiving form and consistence from human laws.

The present system of property in land is not adapted to times of commerce, order, and tranquillity, but to warlike and turbulent ages, when the entire dependence of great bodies of men on their leaders, and the confidence of leaders in their respective bands, were requisite for their common safety.
In the present advanced state of industry, security, and commerce, the
relations and ties which arose out of this mutual dependence, with all
their concomitant pleasures and advantages, are unknown; and the land-
holder, who now abuses that power wherewith an obsolete establishment
has invested him, to the exacting the last farthing his lands can produce,
and effectuating in combination with others a monopoly of that valuable
and necessary commodity, is, though perhaps he knows it not, of all citizens
the most pernicious. He reaps the greatest emoluments from the institutions of society, and contributes least to the increase of plenty, or preservation of order.

It were unjust to censure the proprietors of land, however, for retaining and exercising, as they do, a right whose foundations have not been inquired into, and whose extent no one has ever yet controverted. It is the situation in which they find themselves placed that prompts their conduct, nor can they readily conceive either the injustice or the detriment which the public suffers, by permitting such rights to be exercised. On the other hand, the farmers and cultivators have no clear perception of the injustice and oppression which they suffer. They feel indeed, and they complain, but do not understand, or dare not consider steadily, from what cause their grievances take their rise. The oppressive rights of the one order, and the patient submission of the other, have grown up together insensibly from remote ages, in which the present state of human affairs could not be foreseen.
2. No individual can derive from this general right of occupancy a title to any more than an equal share of the soil of his country. His actual possession of more cannot of right preclude the claim of any other person who is not already possessed of such equal share.*
* Nor yet that it should be appropriated in such a manner as that, when not more than half cultivated, the farther cultivation and improvement should be stopped short, and the industry of millions willing to employ themselves in rendering the earth more fertile should be excluded from its proper field, and denied any parcel of the soil, on which it could be exercised, with security of
reaping its full produce and just reward.

3. This title to an equal share of property in land seems original, inherent, and indefeasible by any act or determination of others, though capable of being alienated by our own. It is a birthright which every citizen still retains. Though by entering into society and partaking of its advantages, he must be supposed to have submitted this natural right to such regulations as may be established for the general good, yet he can never be understood to have tacitly renounced it altogether; nor ought anything less to establish such alienation than an express compact in mature age, after having been in actual possession, or having had a free opportunity of entering into the possession of his equal share.

4. Every state or community ought in justice to reserve for all its citizens the opportunities of entering upon, or returning to, and resuming this their birthright and natural employment, whenever they are inclined to do so.
Whatever inconveniences may be thought to accompany this reservation, they ought not to stand in the way of essential justice.

Although at first sight such reservation may appear incompatible with the established order of societies and the permanent cultivation of the earth, yet ought it on the other hand to be presumed, that what is so plainly founded on the natural rights of men, may by wise regulations be rendered at least consistent with the best order and prosperity of societies, and with the progress of agriculture; perhaps, very beneficial to the one, and the highest encouragement to the other.

5. In many rude communities, this original right has been respected, and their public institutions accommodated to it, by annual, or at least frequent partitions of the soil, as among the ancient Germans, and among the native Irish even in Spenser's time. Wherever conquests have taken place, this right has been commonly subverted and effaced. In the progress of commercial arts and refinements, it is suffered to fall into obscurity and neglect.

6. Whatever has been advanced by Mr. Locke and his followers, concerning the right of property in land, as independent of the laws of a higher original than they, and of a nature almost similar to that divine right of kings, which their antagonists had maintained, can only be referred to this original right of equal property in land, founded on that general right of occupancy, which the whole community has, to the territory of the State. This equal right is indeed antecedent to municipal laws, and not to be abolished by them. But it were a mistake to ascribe any such sacred and indefeasible nature to that sort of property in land which is established by the regulations of municipal law, which has its foundation in the right of labour, and may be acquired by individuals, in very unequal degrees of extent, and to the accumulation of which very few states have thought fit to set any limits.
7. That right which the landholder has to an estate, consisting of a thousand times his own original equal share of the soil, cannot be founded in the general right of occupancy, but in the labour which he and those to whom he has succeeded, or from whom he has purchased, have bestowed on the improvement and fertilization of the soil. To this extent, it is natural and just: but such a right founded in labour cannot supersede that natural right of occupancy, which nine hundred and ninety-nine other persons have to their equal shares of the soil, in its original state. Although it may bar the claim of
individuals, it cannot preclude that of the legislature, as trustee and guardian of the whole.

8. In every country where agriculture has made considerable progress, these two rights are blended together, and that which has its origin in labour is
suffered to eclipse the other, founded in occupancy. As the whole extent of soil is affected by both rights at once, and not different parts by each; as these rights subsist together in the same subject, the limits by which their influence and extent may be discriminated from each other do not readily present themselves to the mind; and could these limits be distinctly ascertained,
it may seem still more difficult to suggest any practicable method by which the subjects of each could be actually separated and detached.

9. That every man has a right to an equal share of the soil, in its original state, may be admitted to be a maxim of natural law. It is also a maxim of natural
law, that every one, by whose labour any portion of the soil has been rendered more fertile, has a right to the additional produce of that fertility, or to the value of it, and may transmit this right to other men. On the first of these maxims depend the freedom and prosperity of the lower ranks. On the second, the perfection of the art of agriculture, and the improvement of the common
stock and wealth of the community. Did the laws of any country pay equal regard to both these maxims, so as they might be made to produce their respective good effects, without intrenching on one another, the highest
degree of public prosperity would result from this combination.

10. Plans for the establishment of this combination are not, it must be owned, very obvious, nor have they on the other hand been very industriously sought for. Scarcely has any nation actually carried or attempted to carry into execution any plan having this for its object; and not many can be said to have attained in any period of their history those enlarged views of the public
interest which might lead to the investigation or establishment of such a plan.

Rude nations have adhered to the first of these maxims, neglecting the second. Nations advanced in industry and arts have adhered to the second, neglecting
the first.

Could any plan be proposed for uniting these two maxims in operation and effect, still, in rich and industrious nations, the supposed (not the real) interests of the less numerous but more powerful orders of men, would be found in opposition to its establishment.

11. To establish a just combination of these two maxims, at the original foundation of states, so as to render it a fundamental part of their frame and constitution, or to introduce it afterwards with as little violence as may be, to the actual possessions and supposed rights and interests of various orders of men, ought to be the object of all Agrarian laws; and this object being once
distinctly conceived, if wise and benevolent men will turn their attention towards it, no doubt need be entertained that very practicable methods of carrying it into execution will in time be discovered, by comparison of
projects, or from the result of trials.

12. When any piece of land is sold, the price paid by the purchaser may be considered as consisting of three parts, each being the value of a distinct subject, the separate amount of which, men skilful in agriculture, and acquainted with the soil of the country, might accurately enough appreciate.

These parts are:
(1st.) The original value of the soil, or that which it might have borne in its natural state, prior to all cultivation. 
(2nd.) The accessory or improved value of the soil: that, to wit, which it has received from the improvements and cultivation bestowed on it by the last proprietor, and those who have preceded him.

(3rd.) The contingent, or improvable value of the soil: that further value which it may still receive from future cultivation and improvements, over and above defraying the expense of making such improvements;  --  or, as it may be otherwise expressed, the value of an exclusive right to make these improvements.

If, in England, 100 acres of arable are sold for Pound1500, money being at 5 per cent., the contingent value may be reckoned .Pound500  --  for the superior value of that security which land gives may, in a general argument, be supposed to be counterbalanced by the trouble of management. Of the remaining Pound1000, two or three hundred may be computed to be the original value of the soil, a judgment being formed from the nature of the adjoining common, and the Pound700 or Pound800 remaining is to be accounted the amount of the accessory or improved value. In this example, these three parts of the general value are to one another as 2, 8, and 5. If the example is taken from a hundred acres in Bengal, or the lower Egypt, the proportion of the parts may be supposed to
be 10, 4, and 1. If from 100 acres of uncultivated moorland, in Ireland, or the northern counties of England, the proportion of the parts may be as 1, o, and 14.

13. The estate of every landholder may, while he possesses it, be considered as capable of being analysed into these three component parts; and could the value of each be separately ascertained by any equitable method (as by the verdict of an assize), it would not be difficult to distinguish the nature and the extent of his private right, and of that right also which still belongs to the
community, in those fields which he is permitted, under the protection of municipal law, to possess. He must be allowed to have a full and absolute right to the original, the improved, and contingent value of such portion of his
estate, as would fall to his share, on an equal partition of the territory of the State among the citizens. Over all the surplus extent of his estate, he has a full right to the whole accessory value, whether he has been the original improver himself, or has succeeded to, or purchased from the heirs or assignees of such improver. But to the original and contingent value of this surplus extent he
has no full right. That must still reside in the community at large, and, though seemingly neglected or relinquished, may be claimed at pleasure by the legislature, or by the magistrate, who is the public trustee.*
* Even in those countries where the extensive rights of the pro-
prietors of land are most firmly established and guarded, as in Britain,
by laws which they themselves have framed, the magistrate, when any
public occasion requires it, as in constructing new roads, canals, and
streets, building bridges and fortifications, obliges the proprietors, for a
reasonable compensation, to part with as much of the soil as may be
requisite for the intended works. -- There is nothing wanting to complete
the prosperity of Europe, but a rule, or familiar method, according to
which the landholders may be made, for a like compensation, to part
with such portions of the soil as are wanted from time to time, for the
accommodation of particular citizens, desirous to employ their industry
and their stock in the cultivation of the earth, with full security of reaping
the due reward. 
14. The difficulty of ascertaining these different sorts of value, and of separating them from one another, if ascertained, may be supposed in general to have prevented such claims from being made. It is particularly difficult to distinguish the original from the accessory value; nor is the community much injured by suffering these to remain together in the hands of the greater
landholders, especially in countries where land-taxes make a principal branch of the public revenue, and no tax is imposed on property of other kinds. The original value of the soil is, in such states, in fact, treated as a fund belonging to the public, and merely deposited in the hands of great proprietors, to be, by the imposition of land-taxes, gradually applied to the public use, and which may be justly drawn from them, as the public occasions require, until the whole be exhausted. Equity, however, requires that from such land-taxes those small tenements which do not exceed the proprietor's natural share of the soil should be exempted. To separate the contingent value from the other two is less difficult, and of more importance; for the detriment which the public
suffers by neglecting this separation, and permitting an exclusive right of improving the soil to accumulate in the hands of a small part of the community, is far greater, in respect both of the progress of agriculture, and the comfortable independence of the lower ranks.*

* If the original value of the soil be the joint property of the community,
no scheme of taxation can be so equitable as a land-tax, by which alone
the expenses of the State ought to be supported, until the whole amount
of that original value be exhausted; for the persons who have retained
no portion of that public stock, but have suffered their shares to be deposited in the hands of the landholders, may be allowed to complain, if, before that fund is entirely applied to the public use, they are subjected to taxes, imposed on any other kind of property, or any articles of consumption.

How preposterous, then, is the system of that country which maintains a civil and military establishment, by taxes of large amount, without the assistance of any land-tax at all!  --  In that example may be perceived the true spirit of legislation, as exercised by landholders alone. Without regard to the original value of the soil, the gross amount of property in land is the fittest subject of taxation; and could it be made to support the whole expense of the public, great advantages would arise to all orders of men. What then, it may be said, would not in that case the proprietors of stock in trade, in manufacture and arts, escape taxation, that is, the proprietors of one-half the national income? They would indeed, be so exempted; and very justly, and very profitably for the State; for it accords with the best interests of the community, through successive generations, that active progressive industry should be exempted, if
possible, from every public burden, and that the whole weight should be laid on that quiescent stock, which has been formerly accumulated, as the reward of an industry which is now no longer exerted.

A just and exact valuation of landed property is the necessary basis of an equal land-tax, and the tenant in mortgage ought to sustain a proportional share of the burden, in the actual landholder's stead. To keep a land-tax equal, the valuation ought to be renewed from age to age.

If that valuation returns periodically after long intervals, of half a century or more, instead of repressing the progress of improvement in agriculture, it will tend to excite the utmost diligence in that pursuit.

If in any country there is reason to apprehend that the encumbered state of the finances will constrain the rulers of the State, in a short time, to have recourse to this great fund, the expectation of a new valuation will damp the progress of agriculture; and the intelligent friends of the public good ought to desire that a scheme which cannot be avoided should take place without delay.
Section II
Of the Right of Property in Land, as founded on public Utility

15. THE increase of public happiness is the true primary object which ought to claim the attention of every state. It is to be attained by increasing the common standard or measure of happiness, which every citizen may have a chance of enjoying under the protection of the State; and by increasing the number of citizens, who are to enjoy this common measure of happiness. The increase of opulence, or of dominion, are subordinate objects, and only to be pursued, as they tend to the increase of happiness, or of numbers; to both of which they are in some respects, and in certain cases, unfriendly.*
* It would be unjust to assert that the landholders have premeditated and intended to effect this oppression of the cultivators, so injurious to that order of men, and so little profitable to the landholders themselves; it would be a mistake to suppose that it has been accomplished by any concerted plan of iniquity and fraud. No, it is the course of things that has brought it gradually forward: the natural submission of dependents has been insensibly enforced to this degree; the cultivators have not been sufficiently aware to protect their own right; still less has the sovereign power been attentive to protect the most useful order of men in the State.

16. Whatever regulations tend directly to increase the common measure of happiness, enjoyed by each individual citizen, tend assuredly to increase the number of citizens. But every regulation tending to increase the number of citizens does not certainly tend to increase the common measure of happiness, and in various situations of the community, may tend to diminish it. The first sort of regulations is therefore to be preferred, in case of interference, to the second.

17. The happiness of individuals, or of any great body of men, is nearly in proportion to their virtue and their worth. That manner of life, therefore, which is most favourable to the virtue of the citizens, ought, for the sake of their happiness, to be encouraged and promoted by the legislature. Men employed in cultivating the soil, if suffered to enjoy a reasonable independence, and a just share of the produce of their toil, are of simpler
manners, and more virtuous, honest dispositions, than any other class of men. The testimony of all observers, in every age and country, concurs in this, and the reason of it may be found in the nature of their industry, and its reward. Their industry is not like that of the laboring manufacturer, insipidly uniform, but varied,  --  it excludes idleness without imposing excessive drudgery, and its
reward consists in abundance of necessary accommodations, without luxury and refinement.

18. The families which are employed in this healthful industry, and live in this comfortable independence, increase more than others in different situations of life. It is by their progeny chiefly that the waste of great cities, of armies, navies, commercial and manufacturing occupations is continually supplied.

19. The labour of men applied to the cultivation of the earth tends more to increase the public wealth, for it is more productive of things necessary for the accommodation of life, wherein all real wealth consists, than if it were applied to any other purpose; and all labour applied to refined and commercial arts, while the State can furnish or procure opportunities of applying it to the cultivation of the soil, may be said to be squandered and misapplied, unless in so far as it is given to those liberal arts, whose productions operate on the mind, and rouse the fancy or the heart.

20. The most obvious, the surest, and least equivocal indication of prosperity and happiness is the strength and comeliness of a race of men.* 
* If it be asked what is the most natural state of human kind, it may be replied, that in which the whole tribe or race approach near to one common standard of comeliness and strength, without any mixture of deformed, dwarfish, or mutilated individuals. In other species of animals, this is always found to take place in their natural state. If we would ascertain whether the slaves of antiquity were more or less happy than the modern artisans, manufacturers, cottars, and men of various degraded ranks and vocations, abounding in great cities, we ought to inquire whether they degenerated as perceptibly, and became as dwarfish and deformed, as the races of these men become.

21. Those who are employed in agriculture, if not oppressed by the superior orders, if permitted to enjoy competent independence and rustic plenty, remote from the contagion of intemperance, are known to excel in strength, comeliness, and good health, every other class of men in civilized nations; and are only excelled in those respects by some simple tribes of men, who enjoy the advantages common to both in a still higher degree.
22. From all these considerations it may perhaps appear that the best, plainest, and most effectual plan which any government can pursue for increasing the happiness and the numbers of its people is to increase the number of independent cultivators, to facilitate their establishments, and to bring into that favourable situation as great a number of citizens as the extent of its territory will admit. Of two nations equal in extent of territory and in number of citizens, that may be accounted the happiest in which the number of independent cultivators is the greatest.

23. Any given country will then have the greatest possible number of independent cultivators, when each individual of mature age shall be possessed of an equal share of the soil; and in such country the common
measure or standard of happiness will probably have reached its highest degree.

Whether therefore we inquire into the natural rights and privileges of men, or consult for the best interests of the greater number, the same practical regulations for the economy of property in land seem to result from either
inquiry.
24. Whatsoever plans seem to promise the increase of wealth, happiness, and numbers in any other channel than the freedom and independence of cultivation, are of a more doubtful nature, and may well have their claim to
public encouragement postponed until this paramount object of good policy be carried to its utmost perfection.*
* That nation is greatly deceived and misled which bestows any encouragement on manufactures for exportation, or for any purpose but the necessary internal supply, until the great manufactures of grain and pasturage are carried to their utmost extent. It can never be the interest of the community to do so; it may be that of the landholders, who desire indeed to be considered as the nation itself, or at least as being representatives of the nation, and having the same interest with the whole body of the people.

In fact, however, their interest is, in some most important respects,
directly opposite to that of the great body of the community, over whom
they exercise an ill-regulated jurisdiction, together with an oppressive
monopoly in the commerce of land to be hired for cultivation.

The encouragements granted to commerce and manufactures, and so
universally extolled, seem merely schemes devised for employing the poor
and finding subsistence for them, in that manner which may bring most
immediate profit to the rich: and these methods, are, if not deliberately,
at least without inquiry, preferred to others, which might bring greater
advantage to the body of the people directly, and ultimately even to the
rich themselves.

25. Manufactures and commerce promise such augmentation of wealth and people. Some degree of both is requisite for the progress of agriculture, and must attend it; but neither of them can in any situation of things have any title to encouragement at the risk of obstructing independent agriculture. The balance of their respective claims may always be adjusted in the most unexceptionable manner, by leaving men wholly to their free choice, and removing all obstruction and monopoly equally from the pursuit of both. Let all freedom be given to him who has stock, to employ it in any sort of trade, manufacture, or agriculture, that he may choose; and let it be made equally easy for the farmer to acquire the full property of the soil on which he is to exercise his industry, as for the manufacturer to acquire the full property of the rude materials he is to work up.*

* The progress of agriculture will more readily excite the activity of manufactures, and carry that branch of national industry to its proper
pitch, than the progress of manufactures will carry agriculture to its most
prosperous state, though each, it must be confessed, has a reciprocal influence on the other. 

In certain countries, manufactures seem to have advanced beyond their proper pitch, and begin very sensibly to affect the race of people and their manners. Notwithstanding the great progress which agriculture has made in
England, still greater remains to be made: though regarded by foreign nations as an example worthy of imitation, it remains for Britain still to surpass the best examples hitherto given.

The chief obstacle to rapid improvement of agriculture is plainly that monopoly of land which resides in the proprietors, and which the commercial system of the present age has taught them to exercise with artful strictness, almost everywhere.

26. That every field should be cultivated by its proprietor, is most favourable to agriculture, and cultivation. That every individual who would choose it should be the proprietor of a field, and employed in its cultivation, is most favourable to happiness, and to virtue. In the combination of both circumstances will be found the most consummate prosperity of a people and of their country,  --  and the best plan for accommodating the original right of universal occupancy with the acquired rights of labour.*

:: The fields around every gentleman's seat are cultivated in a better manner, and raised to a higher degree of fertility, than those of the adjacent farms, because they have been for ages cultivated by the proprietors of the soil: in them is seen to what degree of fertility the whole cultivable lands of any country may be brought, were every field in like manner cultivated by its proprietor.

There is no natural obstacle to prevent the most barren ground from being brought by culture to the same degree of fertility with the kitchen garden of a villa, or the suburbs of a great town. An attentive application of the natural manure of the fields may effect it in a long course of time: the plentiful and judicious use of extraneous manures, the great fund of which in the limestone quarries and marl pits of the earth cannot be exhausted, will accomplish it in a much shorter period; but the present care and the secure interest of a proprietor is required for both. With a view to depreciate the public credit and resources of this nation, it has been observed that England has almost no uncultivated land to be improved. But the author (Dr. Franklin, in a paper circulated in 1777) of that observation knows well, that four-fifth parts of the cultivated lands of England are cultivated in a very imperfect manner, and may be yet raised to a fertility twice if not three times as great as that which they presently have.  --  This is a fund to which the wisdom of the nation may sometime have recourse, and by which the industry and internal wealth of the community may be supported, even in the worst extremities; nor can it be torn from us but with the independence of the State.

An unlimited property in land ought not to be possessed by any citizen; a restricted property in land cannot be communicated to too great a number.
That high prosperity which some states have attained, by the encouragement of manufactures, and the prosecution of commerce, on enlarged and liberal principles, has become of late the object of emulation, perhaps of envy, to others, so that all civilized nations are now impatient to become manufacturing and commercial in their turn. Yet before the example was set, no one had apprehended the possibility of exciting so much active industry, nor the important effects it was to produce in the great system of Europe.
Hereafter, perhaps, some fortunate nation will give the example of
setting agriculture free from its fetters also, and of introducing a change
in that department of industry, similar to that which has been accomplished in manufactures and commerce, by the dissolving of monopolies, and removing obstructions and restraints. A new emulation will then arise among the nations hastening to acquire that still higher vigour and prosperity, which the emancipation of the first and most useful of all arts cannot fail to produce.

Cultivation by slaves, by villeins, and by metayers, have succeeded one another all over the west of Europe. In England, even the last of these is totally worn out, and has given place to cultivation by farmers, whilst in France two-third parts of the land is still cultivated by metayers, and in Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Russia a yet greater proportion is still cultivated by villeins and slaves. In all these successive changes the landholder has still found his advantage in communicating to the occupier of the ground a greater and greater degree of security in his possession, and the public prosperity has kept pace with this good administration of the landholder's private estate. England perhaps owes that power and lustre, by which she surpasses other nations, chiefly to her having preceded them in the prosecution of these changes. Ought it not therefore to be tried whether the landholder may not still further improve his own interest, as well as the public good, by pursuing the same line a little farther, and communicating still greater security and
independence to the cultivators of his fields?

No impracticable Utopian scheme can be said to be suggested, in proposing that property in land should be diffused to as great a number of citizens as may desire it: that is only proposing to carry somewhat farther, and render more extensive, a plan which the experience of many ages has shown to be very practicable, and highly beneficial in every public and private respect.
It is the oppression of the landholders and their agents, which has ever been the bane of Europe, more than even the oppression of the most arbitrary governments; and the absence of this more close and prying oppression renders the despotic governments of the East not intolerable to their subjects. However numerous and powerful that body of men, by whom this oppressive right is presently exercised, it may in the course of ages be reduced within proper limits, as other exorbitant invasions of the common rights of men have sometimes been.

The institutions of the Mosaical law respecting property in land have been but little attended to by the learned.  To that most respectable system an appeal may be made in support of these speculations; for the aim of the Mosaical regulations plainly is, that every field should be cultivated by its proprietor, and that every descendant of Jacob should possess in full property a field which he might cultivate.

Whoever shall consider the probable effect of such an institution in increasing the number of people, will cease to wonder at the uncommon populousness of Judea in ancient times. The same effect might be renewed in that country, could these Agrarian regulations be restored to their force. The same effect might be exhibited in almost any district of Europe in which they could be established for any length of time.
While sovereigns, judges, and clergymen, have made continual reference to the Mosaical law, as to a standard by which their regulations and their claims were justified and enforced, it may seem strange, and worthy of regret, that the common people have never had recourse to the same standard, and claimed the advantages of an Agrarian institution, so favourable to the independence of agriculture, the increase of population, and the comfortable state of the lower classes of men.

Occasion will be found of treating more at length of the Mosaical Agrarian, considered as an economical regulation, in a history of property in land, which may hereafter be offered to the public. In any just system of regulations relative to property in land, the chief difficulty must be to reconcile the interests of an improving agriculture with the natural rights of every individual to a certain share of the soil of his country; but in the present state of municipal law in Europe, the interest of improving agriculture is sacrificed, and yet the right of the people to a common possession, or to equal shares on partition, is not provided for. Both are given up, in favour of the lordly rights of one pre-eminent order of men.
Of the Abuse and Pernicious Effects of that Exorbitant Right of Property in Land, which the Municipal Laws of Europe have established

27. THE means by which a state may attain or approach near to this consummate prosperity cannot be thought to exceed the compass of human
wisdom duly applied; yet if we consider the nature and the effects of that system of property in land, which has superseded all others in the enlightened nations of Europe, and against which hardly any complaint has arisen, we shall find them very different from what might be expected of any system, in which even the smallest attention was paid to the natural rights, or the
attainable happiness of the great body of the people.

Of a million of acres, scarcely twenty thousand are cultivated by proprietors.
Of a thousand citizens, masters of families, scarcely five hundred are employed in cultivating the soil for their own account, while four hundred and fifty of the remainder would prefer (or at the time of choosing their employment for life would have preferred) that to their present occupation, could they procure on reasonable terms the opportunity of exercising it.
Of five hundred cultivators, not more than twenty are proprietors, or have any permanent tenure of the soil which they cultivate.
Of ten thousand acres, scarcely ten are raised to that highest degree of fertility which experience has shown that the common soil of the country may be brought to, by the judicious culture of occupiers, to whom the remotest advantages of that improvement are secured.

Of one thousand people, not five can be thought to be endowed with that degree of strength and comeliness, which nature seems to have intended for the human race.

28. All these untoward circumstances, which take place in most countries in Europe, in a higher degree than what is here specified, may be traced up, as to their cause, to that exclusive right to the improvable value of the soil which a few men, never in any country exceeding one hundreth part of the community, are permitted to engross -- a most oppressive privilege, by the operation of which the happiness of mankind has been for ages more invaded and restrained, than by all the tyranny of kings, the imposture of priests, and the chicane of lawyers taken together, though these are supposed to be the
greatest evils that afflict the societies of human kind.

29. The silent but pervading energy of this oppression comes home to the bosoms and to the firesides of the lowest orders of men, who are thereby rendered mean-spirited and servile. It begets in them also, for their own defence, so much cunning, fraud, hypocrisy, and malignant envy towards those who enjoy affluence, that by its wide and continual operation the virtue of mankind is more corrupted, and their minds more debased, than by all the luxury and ostentatious meanness of courts, together with the debauched indigence and riotous profusion of great cities. 
