VII. The property acquired in these allotments shall not carry along with it any right of common of any sort in the commons, woodlands, private roads, or other appendages of the manor, excepting only, in the nearest well and watering-pond, and in the bog or common for turf, if that is the fuel of the country; in which case this right is to be regulated by the usages of the manor, as if the allotment had been given off in lease only. Neither shall any use, prescription, or connivance ever in course of time procure to the holder of such allotment any right of common, that is not founded on and ascertained by express compact.

The Agrarian laws of antiquity seem to have failed in producing durable and beneficial effects, chiefly from two circumstances:

(1st.) Their operation was sudden, violent, and occasional only, whereas the progressive Agrarian is so constituted as to exert a continual influence, more or less intense, in proportion as the general interests of the community may require.

(2nd.) The ancient Agrarian laws were easily, and thus generally, evaded; as they opposed the whole body of those who wanted lands, to the whole body of those who possessed more than the legal allotment, without assigning to individuals a specific right in any particular fields or district, a general convulsion of the State must have attended every attempt to call forth the energy of law. To avoid these tumults, all persons soon became disposed to connive at various evasions of these laws, and to acquiesce in their falling into desuetude, until some popular leader arose and called anew for their restoration. But the progressive Agrarian assigns particular definite rights to a few men, within every district of moderate extent; it opposes the natural claims and the indigence of these few men to the exorbitant possessions and the opulence of a still smaller number within the same district. The facility of evasion must be much diminished by this regulation. The vigilance of the claimants, being confined to a narrow space, will be more awake and precise; their limited rights founded on a local claim, and derived from their birth,
will be more distinctly conceived by themselves, and more readily supported by the concurring sentiments of all other men.

52. Without venturing to make openly any alteration in that system of landed property, which, like systems of corrupted religion, is regarded with superstitious reverence in countries where it has long obtained, many
occasions will occur, whereof advantage may be taken to introduce under the cover of other objects, and as part of the usual proceedings of the State, such regulations as may tend very effectually, though by remote and indirect influence, to promote the independence of the plough, and the distribution of property in land, in small allotments, among the lowest ranks of the people.
If, for example, new taxes are to be levied, what subjects of taxation can be more justly liable to the imposition, or more productive, than large farms and
short leases? *
* Any tax imposed on extensive farms might from its novelty be regarded as a grievance; but the servants' tax, which is so justly popular, might be applied to the same purpose, if extended to hired servants employed in agriculture, when more than one are kept in the same family, and to rise to still higher rates in proportion to the numbers kept.

The popular voice has demanded a heavy tax on the foreign domestics, that are so frequently to be seen in the families of the rich; but the suggestion ought not to meet with attention. These foreigners are generally employed in frivolous offices in the train of opulence and luxury, and were they proscribed by the imposition of any heavy tax, an equal number of robust Englishmen would be called away from their rustic labours, and other necessary employments, allured by higher wages, to perform more awkwardly the same servile tasks, and to lead the same dissipated lives. The profitable industry of the nation would be diminished in proportion.
The landlord, by adopting these plans in the management of his estate, means to derive advantage to himself, from measures which at once obstruct the
increase of population, and diminish the spirit and independence of the common people; and if his right to make these invasions on the public good cannot be directly attacked, let him at least be obliged to indemnify the public in some degree, by some other mode, more familiar to the minds of men.

A tax imposed on barren lands, and so regulated as to engage the proprietor in their immediate cultivation, or oblige him to resign them to the community for
general distribution, could not be esteemed in the smallest degree unjust. His right to these barren lands is founded solely on occupation; there is no improved value superadded, no right accruing from labour bestowed, and as he occupies, besides, more than his equal share of the soil, the whole unimproved tracts of his estate belong strictly and entirely to the public; and no small indulgence is shown in giving him an option to improve or to resign them.

A tax on all augmentation of rents, even to the extent of one-half the increase, would be at once the most equitable, the most productive, the most easily
collected, and the least liable to evasion of all possible taxes, and might with inconceivable advantage disencumber a great nation from all those injudicious imposts by which its commercial exchanges are retarded and restrained, and its domestic manufactures embarrassed.* 
* An absolute monarch might combine together the increase of his
revenue and the encouragement of small farms in the same regulation,
by imposing a heavy tax on all future increase of rent, excepting in those
farms which did not exceed the extent of one plough, and were granted
in lease for a term of not less than fifty years. Such an edict must operate
beneficially, either by bringing money into the treasury of the State, or
by increasing the number of citizens in the most useful class.

If the increase of population is to be promoted by encouraging the marriages of the lower ranks, let every farmer be entitled to an addition of five years to the duration of his lease (whatever that may be) for the first legitimate child, and of three years for every other.

Let every person whatever, not possessed of lands, and having five children, be entitled to the privileges of the Agrarian law, within a certain district. If the improvement of agriculture is to be promoted and rewarded, let not the prize held forth to those who excel be, as it has sometimes been in France, the rank
of nobility, but rather the full property, under reservation of the present rent, of those farms to which their skill and industry have been applied; and let an annual prize or prizes of this sort be proposed not for the whole extent of a great kingdom, but for every small district and neighbourhood.

If any changes are to be made in the municipal laws, relative to succession, inheritance, or the transmission of property in any other form, let them not pass unaccompanied by the introduction of some mode of the Agrarian law, extended over the estates of those persons whose interests or caprice are consulted in the intended change. Let no land estate, for example, pass to heirs of entail, nor even to collaterals in the ordinary course of succession, without becoming subject to such a law, even in its utmost extent.

53. Certain regulations which have formerly taken place, and are like enough to be renewed in flourishing states, are of such a nature, that they ought to be
accompanied by the introduction of some branches of the progressive Agrarian law, as an equivalent and compensation in some degree to those orders of men whose interests are encroached on by the change; and as a
very moderate deduction from the advantages of those other orders, for whose advantage chiefly such regulations are intended, two remarkable examples may be pointed out in the reduction of interest, and the corn laws.

Every reduction of interest throws a great immediate advantage into the hands of the landholders, who are in general encumbered with debts: the interest of these debts being reduced, their actual income is thereby increased; besides, this reduction increases the value of their property in land, if they are obliged to sell off a part, or the whole; and it tends to enhance the rent of farms, by determining persons who had formerly lived on the mere annual rents of their stock, to betake themselves now to some sort of industry, and to agriculture
more than any other, as being that alone which men are supposed qualified to undertake, without any particular education to fit them for it.

All those laws which prohibit the importation of grain into any country, and still more those which give a premium on the exportation, are calculated to bestow great advantages on the farmer and landholder, though chiefly on the latter, at the expense of that far more numerous class of citizens, who till no land for their own behoof, and must purchase all the grain or bread consumed in their families from the landlord and the farmer, or their agents and retailers.

Commonly one-half of the slender incomes which men of this class enjoy must be expended on this indispensable article, the price of which is, by these laws,
kept up one-fourth or more above its natural level. Is it not highly reasonable, then, that the industrious poor, who are taxed in this manner, and to this amount, without their consent, for the behoof not of the public, but of other orders of men richer than themselves, should have it at least in their power to
pass with ease from that class of people, who must go to market to purchase this commodity, to the class of those who raise and have it to sell? The introduction of a progressive Agrarian law, extending over the demesnes of the crown, waste lands, and farms of too great extent, would produce this effect in no inconsiderable degree, and would at the same time essentially promote the object of all corn laws, if that object be indeed the prosperity and increase of agriculture, and not rather the profitable monopoly of the landholders.

54. It is by no means without example that the legislative power of a state, however tender of seeming to meddle with the general system of property in land, should interfere to impose some regulations on the manner of granting leases. Ireland furnishes a recent example of some importance, and the laws of many countries have, on various occasions, interposed their authority to protect the peasants from outrageous oppressions, from violent and sudden removals, and from the pretensions of a new purchaser, coming in
place of their former lord.*
* What is the shortest term of a lease which ought to be given by the landlord or accepted by the cultivator? In Ireland, that may be exactly determined by the statutes to be not less than thirty-one years. For if any great landholder resolves not to give leases of more than twenty-one years, he determines to treat his Protestant tenantry more unkindly, and more unreasonably than the legislature, actuated by the most violent spirit of persecution, thought it proper or decent that the Roman Catholics should be treated.

In this field, there is great room, without seeming to pass beyond the usual jurisdiction of municipal law, for introducing into most countries new and beneficial regulations, relative to the three essential articles of a lease, the extent, the duration, and the rent to be paid.In respect of duration all leases ought to be of considerable length (sufficient at least for the farmer to bring up his family, and settle them around him, Without being removed himself), and of uncertain termination, ending with a life. New forms, adapted to the
advantage of both parties, might easily be devised; as, for example, a lease which might be called a lease on alternate lives, beginning with that of the lessee, and ending with the life of that person who shall have come into the place or right of the lessor, when the first life falls, or when any number of years  --  20, 30,40, or more  --  from that uncertain date have elapsed.

That the extent of the farms set in lease should be moderate, is certainly most advantageous to the community in general, and may be so adjusted as to prove
not less favourable to the interest of the landlord. The rent to be paid ought always to be fixed at a determined proportion of the real or estimated annual produce of the soil; and this proportion being determined by the letter of the law, the application of that law to each particular case ought to be committed to a jury from the neighbourhood, if either party so desire. Leases on improvement, as they are called, if considered according to the principles of natural equity, must be accounted altogether absurd and unjust; for they avowedly take from the farmer, as his cultivation advances, a share of that increased produce to which his industry has given rise, in order to bestow it on a landlord who has contributed nothing at all to the improvement of the soil; yet, in respect of expedience, they are to be regarded as among the best and most practicable compromises, which, under that establishment of land property which now obtains, can be brought about between the exorbitant rights of the landlord and the reasonable expectations of the farmer. Various
beneficial schemes of such leases have been proposed, and some carried into execution; yet great scope still remains for varying their form, and combining new stipulations in such a manner, as that both parties may be interested in the progressive improvement of the soil. But the interposition of the legislature seems necessary in most countries, to render the landholders willing to give the preference to leases of this kind.

55. By the laws of many nations, a right of redemption {Jus retractus) belongs to the superior lord, or to the nearest of kin of the landholder, who sells his estate. By this right, they are entitled to redeem the land sold at the agreed price, within a limited time, common twelve months after the bargain has been struck; and so generally is this privilege established on the Continent, that it has been considered as a branch of the law of nations. Much more justice and much more good policy would there be, in conferring such a right
on the tenants and cultivators of the lands alienated, if, within a limited time, any number of them, not less than one-third part, could form a scheme, to be approved by the tribunals of justice, for purchasing the estate among them, by advancing one-half the price, or any other proportion required by law, and converting the remainder into reserved rents. The public ought even in justice and in policy to come to their assistance in forming such a scheme, and to advance the money wanted, on proper security to have it repaid by gradual
instalments, or converted into perpetual reserved rents, which might again be sold, at no great discount of that value which had been given for them.

56. Various occurrences in the political revolutions of government have frequently stripped the ancient proprietors of large tracts of land, and thrown the absolute disposal of these lands into the hands of the rulers of the State: such are the forfeitures usually following on unsuccessful insurrections and conspiracies, the subversion of obnoxious associations, as the Templars and Jesuits ; the dissolution of the monasteries, and the reformation of ecclesiastical establishments in the north of Europe. The courtiers and grandees who have been enriched on these occasions by the profusion of
their sovereigns, might have been equally well gratified and attached by the donation of seignorial rights and reserved rents alone, and the property of the soil might have been all at once conferred on the cultivators, or rendered subject to the operation of a progressive Agrarian law; or indeed both regulations might have been made to take place at the same time ; that is, the
property might have been given to the present cultivators, but subject to future claims arising from the Agrarian law.

Such a disposal of escheated or forfeited lands may, without regard to the encouragement of agriculture and the independence of the plough, be recommended by policy of State alone, as tending to interest the lowest
as well as the highest ranks in those innovations, whether justly or unjustly concerted, which the sovereign is desirous of having accomplished.

Would not, it may be asked, that great transfer of property made in Ireland by Cromwell have been almost equally acceptable to his captains and officers at
the time, had it been accompanied with a progressive Agrarian law? And would not the effect of such a law, so applied, have shown itself in the most beneficial manner to Ireland long before the present age? Had the lands left vacant by the expulsion of the Moors been distributed in full property to cultivators only, might not even Spain have recovered in a few generations the effects of that severe wound?
Section III
Of Circumstances which might induce the Rulers of a State to turn their wishes and endeavours towards the accomplishment of such a Change

57. SUCH occasions and incidents, as those before enumerated, might be improved by the sovereign, the legislature, or the real patriots of any
country, for introducing by degrees this important innovation, it being supposed that they are beforehand fully apprized of its great utility, and animated by a warm desire of seeing it effectually established for the
advantage of the community.*
* It seems to have been unfortunate for the Romans, that in the age of the Gracchi the practice of granting leases for any considerable term of years was not familiar, and the alienation of land under a reserved rent wholly unknown. Had Tiberius Gracchus proposed to the Patricians either of these plans for accommodating the poor citizens with lands, a compromise might probably have taken place, to the great advantage of both. He would not have encountered such determined opposition at first, nor would he have been forced into the violent measures he afterwards adopted.

In the history of this illustrious citizen of Rome, those men who may hereafter undertake the patronage of general rights, and of the lower classes of mankind, may find an instructive example, how necessary it is to adhere to moderation, even in the noblest pursuits, and not to suffer the insolent and unreasonable obstinacy of opponents to provoke any passionate retaliation. Had Gracchus persevered in maintaining his first temperate and liberal proposal, -- had he not impetuously, it cannot be said unjustly, hurried into the extreme opposite to that which his antagonists held, it cannot be doubted that his great endeavours might have proved fortunate for himself and his country.
Other occurrences and aspects of affairs tend to inspire with such generous desires either the sovereign or some considerable bodies of men in the State, capable of exerting powerful efforts in so laudable a cause, and with the desire may communicate the hope also of being able to accomplish some salutary changes of greater or of less importance, especially if the object to be aimed
at, and the means by which it may be obtained, have been again and again stated to the public in a variety of speculative views, and so rendered familiar to the understandings of men.

Internal convulsions have arisen in many countries by which the decisive power of the State has been thrown, for a short while at least, into the hands of the collective body of the people. In these junctures they might have obtained a just re-establishment of their natural rights to independence of cultivation and to property in land, had they been themselves aware of their title to such rights, and had there been any leaders prepared to direct them in the mode of stating their just claim, and supporting it with necessary firmness and becoming moderation.  --  Such was the revolution in 1688, at which time, surely, an article declarative of the natural right of property in land might have been inserted into the Bill of Rights, had the people at large been beforehand taught to understand that they were possessed of any such claim. Such also was the late convulsion in America, the favourable opportunities of which are not yet exhausted; and whatever party shall hereafter in the agitations of any state assume the patronage of the lower classes, in respect of this their most essential privilege, may entertain confident hopes of being able by their support to obtain their own particular object of pursuit, while at the same time they establish an arrangement of the highest importance to the general
welfare of their fellow-citizens.

58. Princes sitting on disputed thrones might, among other expedients for giving additional security to their possession, consider whether it would not prove of advantage that the numerous class of cultivators were interested in their cause by some well-regulated communication of equal right; and on the other hand, the expelled candidate might not unwisely seize the same
occasion of strengthening his interest and increasing the number of his adherents, if it were left not preoccupied by his more fortunate antagonist.
In such cases as these, when the minds of the vulgar are to be suddenly engaged, it is perhaps more expedient not to propose a refined system, having for its object the greatest good that can be reconciled to the greatest supposed equity, or to the general convenience of all, but to hold forth some striking advantages to great bodies of men, who may feel that they have a common interest, and are not incapable of being taught to act together in concert, for promoting it; to promise, for example, that every farm, as presently possessed,
shall be converted into a freehold, vested in the farmer and his heirs for ever.

59. Difference of religious opinions, it may be hoped, will never again be made, as it has too often been, an occasion of disturbing the civil societies of mankind; but if any respectable body of dissidents find themselves obliged to contend with the rulers of their country for the rights and immunities of a just toleration; if the leaders of the sect shall think proper to avow and inculcate principles of civil policy and justice favourable to the rights of the lower classes, and to the independence of cultivation, they may be well assured of
strengthening their party thereby, of inspiring their adherents with more vigour and consistency, and of obtaining in process of time both the one and the other of these just and important objects of pursuit. These objects they will attain the sooner, and with more ease, the more cautiously they guard against the insinuation of that levelling and fanatic principle which has sometimes brought disgrace in the first place, and final disappointment in the end, on schemes wisely conceived, or bravely undertaken for restoring the rights of mankind.

It is supposed by many intelligent persons that, partly through the increase of infidelity, and partly from the prevailing moderation of wise men's opinions respecting disputable tenets of religion, the ecclesiastical order have of late lost much of that ascendant which they seem formerly to have possessed over the higher classes of men, so that in almost every country of Europe, under every form of the Christian religion, their establishments are either secretly envied and undermined, or very avowedly attacked; and it may be apprehended that a crisis of great danger to their temporal rights and privileges cannot be far distant. It might, therefore, be accounted no unnecessary provision for their own safety, and very liberal policy with regard to the general interests of mankind, should this respected order attach themselves more particularly to the inferior and laborious classes of men. These humble ranks are always found docile and obsequious to religious instructors; and in justice to the simplicity of their native sense and piety, let it be remarked also, that they are more ready to listen with attention to rational and sound doctrines than to the extravagancies of enthusiasm or superstition, if only the same zeal and assiduity is displayed by the teachers of both. It would not ill become the ministers of any Church to assume the patronage of these men (whose reliance and attachment will not fail to increase in proportion to the attention bestowed on them), and to stand forth as the
advocates of their natural rights and the guardians of their independence in opposition to the opulent, the luxurious, and the idle, who in too many respects domineer over them. It would not be unwise nor improper to connect thoroughly the interests of the ecclesiastical order with those of the laborious poor, who stand perhaps more in need of the direction and guardianship of enlightened superiors than the mendicant poor themselves, whom the Church has in every country taken under her immediate protection. In most cases, the mendicant poor would be sufficiently provided for by the charity of those very orders of men by whom the far more numerous class of laborious poor are oppressed.

That sort of correspondence and co-operation which might be denominated an alliance between the Church and the Plough, in subordination to the State, would not only prove equally beneficial to both parties, but seems in the present state of Europe to have become necessary for the support of their mutual interests.

60. Great public calamities and disasters may dispose the rulers of a state, however reluctant and averse, to seek for the renovation of national vigour and prosperity by those measures which are to be accounted the only true sources of strength, opulence, and manly virtues; by cherishing the common people, bettering their condition, and exciting their industry by such cheerful hopes and reasonable expectations as belong to their humble situation, and not by the hard pressure of necessity, so often preposterously and inhumanly
recommended as the most effectual spur of industry, so often unhappily applied as such.

Under circumstances of recent public distress and humiliation, such as the unfortunate issue of expensive war, the loss of commerce and of foreign dominion, even the higher and privileged ranks, awed into wisdom and
humanity by the impending gloom, may be inclined to acquiesce in those regulations which tend to renovate the whole body of the State, though at the expense of diminishing in some degree the privileges and emoluments of their own order. They will consider that, unless the numbers, the industry, and the manly temper of the body of the people can be kept up, the fortune of the community must fall into continual and accelerated decline, and the privileges of every rank become insecure. But if these essential foundations of public
prosperity can be supported, and any increase of them, especially of the last, can be procured, the loss of military glory, of political rank and ascendant, even of territory and establishments, may be regarded with less regret, as the loss of external appendages only, the plumes and trappings of national honour, which may be in due time recovered again by the returning vigour of
the community, if such ought to be their endeavour or desire.
If, in the meantime, commerce is restrained and manufactures decline, let the cultivation of the soil be laid open, on reasonable terms and without delay, to the people thus deprived of their usual employment; such a resource would indeed convert what they must account a misfortune into an opportunity of finding real and natural happiness and ease.

If colonies are lost, it may seem more particularly requisite to provide some new opportunities of settlement for the usual emigration. If the facility of
domestic establishments is presented to their choice, that will not only prevent the turbulence of unsettled, discontented multitudes confined at home, but will apply their numbers, and call forth their industry for the augmentation of the public opulence and strength.

61. Public dangers, especially, if not sudden and transitory, but continual, as proceeding from the vicinity of powerful and ambitious neighbours, ought to produce in the rulers and the higher ranks of a nation so threatened, a similar disposition of recurring to the genuine sources of public opulence and force.
What more effectual preparation can be made for the most vigorous defence of national liberty and independence, than to interest every individual citizen
more immediately and directly in the welfare of his country, by giving him a share in the property of the soil, and training him to the use of arms for its defence.

The former of these means of public security and defence is scarcely less requisite than the latter, the propriety of which is so generally understood.
A great standing army may be sufficient for the purposes of ambition, and for carrying offensive war into foreign states, but if resistance is to be made at home, and a prolonged defence to be maintained against a more powerful invader, the discipline of standing forces, however perfect, must be combined with, and sustained by, the zealous patriotism of a militia. The King of
Prussia, beset by hostile powers naturally superior in strength, has set the first example of a military establishment modelled on this plan; an example which
deserves to be imitated, and will not fail to be so by every potentate in the same perilous situation. The time seems to be not very far distant, when Britain herself must trust no longer with entire reliance to her wooden walls, even in time of peace, but must keep in continual array a land army proportioned in some degree to those of the continental powers. Even the
greater powers themselves, by the continual augmentation of their standing armies, with an intention of invading others, approach still nearer and nearer to the establishment of a disciplined militia, as they continually increase the proportion of soldiers to unwarlike citizens; and when they begin to perceive that they themselves are at last in danger of being invaded in their turn by
the powerful confederacies of neighbours, whom separately they have insulted or held in terror, they will then hasten to adopt the whole plan, in the same manner as these neighbouring powers have already done. Thus, that
continual augmentation of disciplined standing armies throughout Europe, which the friends of liberty and of mankind regard with so much anxiety and distrust, seems to tend to an ultimate state of advancement, in which every ploughman will be made a soldier, and almost every soldier remain a ploughman; a system very favourable, no doubt, to the happiness and virtue of mankind, and more particularly of the lower class; a fortunate and desirable effect, which it may be hoped will arise from so very suspicious a cause as the restless ambition of monarchs. Whenever this state of things is brought near to its maturity in any country, there will be wanting only one regulation to realize the fancied virtues and happiness of primeval ages, though without
that supposed perpetual tranquillity which seems not very consistent with the highest felicity of mankind.

That regulation is, that every individual thus accustomed to the use of arms, and of the instruments of tillage, should be made proprietor of the field which he cultivates.

It is of small importance whether, in this progress, the state has begun with the establishment of a militia, and afterwards trained that militia to the exact discipline and ready array of standing armies; or  --  what is more new in practice and may be more willingly adopted by monarchs  --  beginning with a standing army, has proceeded gradually to extend its compass, and the
rotation of military services exacted, until, almost all those persons are comprehended who would belong to the plan of a militia established in the usual form, without however detaching them from their rustic labours,
or interrupting that essential industry in any great degree; still the same union of the military character with that of the peasant might be accomplished in the
greater number of the people, in nearly the same course of time; still the same facility and expediency will arise, of communicating to each of this majority of the citizens a competent share in the real property of the soil.

62. The state of a nation overwhelmed with debt furnishes the most urgent motives to induce all classes of men willingly to recur to those measures and schemes by which the amount of the public stock may be most effectually, and most expeditiously increased. Among these schemes, the encouragement of improving agriculture, and the increase of an industrious population by
means of independent settlements must be allowed to stand foremost.

It is indeed the landed property of the nation that is ultimately and solely engaged for all national debts: every other species of property may be concealed, transferred, or withdrawn, when the demand for payment is apprehended. It is therefore to be wished, for the security of public credit, and for facilitating the borrowing of money on good terms, when necessity requires that expedient to be pursued, that property in land were exceedingly divided; so that every person of the least consideration for property of any other kind, for industry, or for talents, had a share.

In that state of public affairs which renders the continual accumulation of national debt indispensable, it becomes even the interest of the great landholders, that such a distribution of property in land should take place,
and that every member of the society should, if possible, have a share; that so every member may be rendered responsible for the public debt, and may have, though in an inferior degree, the same sort of interest with regard to it on every emergency which these great landholders have.

Such general distribution of property in land, especially if the public creditors were for the most part proprietors of land also, and in some proportion to the
property possessed by them in the funds, would tend to unite in a great degree the interests and views of the debtors and creditors; and so prevent the danger of any sudden great convulsion, and the perplexities which might attend a temporary stoppage of payment. It would give at the same time the highest facility of employing the whole stock and force of the society in great and useful enterprizes, when such presented themselves, without necessarily entailing oppressive taxes on a future age.*

* The accumulation of a national debt must be acknowledged to be a great evil; yet is it possible that the nature of that evil may be in some degree mistaken, and its distant terrors exaggerated. The comparison which offers itself at first between the incumbrances of a nation and those of an individual's fortune, is just only in a few particulars. Money borrowed by a nation is chiefly furnished by its own subjects, into whose hands it is chiefly paid back for services performed; and the stock of the community, compared with that of its neighbours, is lessened only by the amount of what is borrowed from subjects of a foreign State.

Taxes imposed for defraying the interest of a large debt must, in some degree, endanger the suppression of manufactures, and the loss of foreign commerce. This is, perhaps, the only evil which may not be separated from this accumulation of national debt; nor ought this to be accounted very formidable by a nation abounding with men, and possessing wide tracts of waste or half cultivated land, in the improvement of which the industry of these men may be employed. In such a situation, a nation well informed of its true interests might despise the loss.

But if it is the established opinion of any people, that the public prosperity depends on the flourishing state of their commerce with other nations, that people ought, in consistency, to avoid the occasions of contracting debt.
If a nation already encumbered with a great load of debt foresees rather the necessity of augmenting than any possibility of diminishing the load, that nation ought, beforehand, gradually to prepare those resources by which the public opulence and the industry of the subjects may be sustained, when foreign commerce shall have failed. Whatever national advantages are aimed at by efforts requiring the accumulation of public debt; whatever evils are to be guarded against, as proceeding from such accumulation, a minute partition of property in land must be favourable to the measures of the legislature in either pursuit.
In order to establish, or at least to approach nearer to this the most perfect state of public credit, certain regulations might be introduced with happy effects in a well constituted monarchy; and perhaps without exciting
discontent, especially if any salutary agrarian law had been, established, or a pretty general distribution of landed property been by any other means previously obtained. It might be enacted, that at fixed periods a certain considerable portion of the national debt should be divided among the landholders, in proportion to their property in land; not obliging them to pay off their proportion of the debt, but merely to advance the money for paying it off, and so to become themselves the creditors of the public (instead of being debtors to the public creditors) and to receive the interests which they
formerly paid.

It may be accounted a service which the State is well entitled to require from the proprietors of land, in return for their being suffered to engross the whole original value of the soil, that when the public is over-loaded with debts, not imprudently contracted, they should be obliged, not indeed to pay those debts, but to come forward and interpose their private credit in support of that of the public; and to take their chance of such payment of annual rents or capital as the public may afford to make. Such an occasional partition of the national debt must be acknowledged to be altogether consonant to justice in those nations where the representatives of the proprietors of land have alone consented to, and authorized, the contracting of such incumbrances.

At least it seems probable that, whatever measures may at any time be adopted for diminishing the public debts of a nation, or for preventing those convulsions which on critical emergencies may arise from the competition between the interests of borrowers and lenders, subjects of the same state, all such measures would be greatly facilitated by the minute partition of property
in land, and a general distribution of it among the whole body of the people.

Section IV
Of Public Institutions calculated for promoting a gradual and salutary Change in the state of Property in Land.

63. A S a subsidiary help to all those regulations which might be devised for promoting the prosperity of the lower classes, and, in particular, the independence of the plough, it would not ill become the wisdom of an
attentive government to appoint a special Board, intrusted (under strict account) with the management of considerable sums, to be applied for this essential purpose, in the following or any other plan of like effect:
To purchase such estates exposed to sale, as might be had at a reasonable value (suppose from twenty-five to thirty years' purchase) and to divide them into small farms of a single plough only, to be given off in perpetual property for a full reserved rent. The loss that would be incurred in this transaction might be greatly diminished by selling off these reserved rents, with all the privileges of a landlord, to persons desirous of the best security without the trouble of managing a land estate. The purchaser to have a right of distraining the produce of the soil, together with collateral security on the funds of the Board, and the same facility of transferring his property at any time, and suddenly, by an assignation in their books, which the proprietors of stock
in the public funds of Britain now have. With these advantages, it may be presumed, that such reserved rents would be purchased eagerly by the timorous and the indolent, and probably sell at an advanced value, so
as to reduce the loss on the whole transaction, to two or three years' purchase money of the estate. The money thus refunded to be immediately employed in similar purchases; in making which, estates of a large extent, inhabited by a numerous and poor peasantry, ought to be preferred to others of equal rent-roll. Estates situated in islands, or along the sea coast, might likewise deserve preference; because, for the sake of navigation and fisheries, it concerns the interests of the community at large, that the common people in insular or maritime situations should be brought into that state which is most favourable to their increase of population, and their thriving.

As the operations of such a Board would tend to enhance the value of land when brought to sale, the establishment, it may be thought, would be acceptable enough to the great body of landholders. To such a Board might be committed the office of furnishing to the tenantry of estates exposed to sale
such assistance as they might stand in need of to enable them to complete their schemes of a joint purchase, founded on their right of redemption. To the same Board might likewise be committed the inspection of all lands devised and assigned to hospitals, universities, and any other public or charitable foundations, with a view to prevent that private abuse and peculation, which too generally take place in the management of such funds, when they are in a flourishing condition, and more than sufficient for carrying into execution the original intention of the founder. In these cases, the Board, having first laid a satisfactory proof of such redundance before the supreme tribunals of justice, should be authorized to interfere, and to turn this superfluity to the greatest advantage of the public, by dividing the lands belonging to such foundations into separate allotments of a single plough each, and giving them away in complete property for a reserved rent.

The charitable foundations of one age may become superfluous, nay, pernicious, in those that follow, as the numerous hospitals and almsgivings of the Italian cities are justly considered as no small obstruction to the industry of their common people; and for various reasons, it cannot be unfit that the legislature of every country should exercise a constant and supreme control
over all such establishments; yet directed by a scrupulous observance of the original intention of the founder, excepting where it is no longer fit that these intentions should be fulfilled; in all which cases, the produce of the funds ought to be religiously applied to those public uses and charitable occasions which, it may be supposed, the munificent spirit of the founders would have disposed them, had they lived in the present times, to patronize and prefer.

That bill which was brought into the British Parliament some years ago for enabling the governors of hospitals, and the trustees of other charitable foundations, to place in the public funds the estates intrusted to their care, seems to have been meant as a very gentle attempt to apply the redundant opulence of such establishments to the support of public credit and the
general advantage of the State. It was an attempt entirely consonant to the best principles of national interest and of legislative superintendence, nor could that vehement dislike by which the bill was rendered abortive have arisen solely from public considerations, unless inflamed by the patronage of jobbing and secret peculation.

64. It is not wholly in vain that premiums have been distributed for the encouragement of various improvements in agriculture and the arts. Great effects cannot be expected to result from them, but a general notification at least is made to the public of those things which speculative men of enlarged views conceive to be most advantageous and practicable. Trials made in
different places and under a variety of circumstances ensue: and examples are exhibited, by which the advantages and disadvantages of the proposed improvements are subjected to general examination, in almost every corner; and other methods perhaps are suggested, more profitable on the whole, or better adapted to particular situations.

Trials and examples, it is presumed, are alone wanting to recommend the general participation of property in land to the favourable opinion and wishes of all ranks of men. In such examples, the landholders might perceive how small a part of their privileges and emoluments need to be given up, for promoting this, the greatest public good of the community, and what new advantages will spring up in compensation for those relinquished. The rulers of nations might perceive how much they are like to increase the numbers,
and improve the character and virtues of their people; and the common people themselves can, from such examples alone, be taught to know what improvement their humble condition may receive, and with what ardour they ought to endeavour to attain it.

With a view to produce such examples in different parts of a wide country, the same plan might be adopted, which in matters of far less importance has been pursued with no inconsiderable success. A great premium, either honorary or lucrative, might be held forth to the nobleman or commoner of a certain ample fortune, or possessing land estates of a certain great extent, who should within ten years establish the greatest number, not less than two hundred cultivators, settled in farms, from twenty to forty acres, held in freehold; or by leases of long duration, three or four different forms of which might be proposed, as equally admissible. Less considerable premiums, yet such as only the treasury or the public honours of the community could furnish, might be offered to persons of different inferior degrees of estate for proportional establishments. Since such rewards and such marks of public approbation have been held forth for the cultivation of the best sorts of grain, and other profitable crops, why should it be accounted preposterous to appoint suitable premiums, if such can be found, for rearing and increasing the best sort of citizens, that virtuous and laborious class of men, of whom the severe Roman has said with delight that they are viri fortissimi -- milites strenuissitni -- & minime
male cogitantes?
Section V
Of such examples and beginnings of Reformation, as might be expected from the generous efforts of private Persons acting singly

65. THE private interest of the landholders thoroughly understood, and pursued on enlarged plans, might incline them to adopt the same schemes of small farms, and leases of long duration, which appear to be so eminently favourable to the great interests of the community. This expedience is more particularly apparent in those large estates which are not in hazard of being brought to market every other generation, but may be expected to pass, as they have already done, from one age to another in the possession of the same
family. On such estates, leases on improvement may be introduced still more beneficial to the interests of the proprietor's family than to those of the cultivator's, yet even to them far more eligible than any lease of a less
permanent tenure. But if the present proprietor cannot be induced, for the sake of distant advantages to his family, and the general prosperity of those who are employed in tilling his estate, to divest himself, or his immediate successors, of all power of renewing leases; still, great advantage might arise from an arrangement which would keep a certain proportion of the farms, as
every third or fourth farm up and down the estate, on leases of very considerable duration; these, when they fell, to be replaced by others, so that the proportion should be still the same. These permanent and valuable
leases would tend to bring about the accumulation of stock on the estate, and the establishment of wealthy farmers, by whose younger sons, or other relations, it might be expected, that advanced rents would be given for the adjoining farms, even on leases of much shorter duration.

The English landholders seem to deviate more from their own and from the public interest by the preference they give to farms of large extent, than by any unwillingness to grant leases of considerable duration. The saving of expense in repairs seems in general to be their inducement, and that very essential article ought to be regulated, no doubt, and might perhaps without difficulty be regulated in a better manner. Might not the conditions of the lease be so adjusted as to give the tenant an interest in keeping down the expense of
repairs, and seeing them well made, and without delay?

Might not the houses on his farm (and these neither too large nor too many) be delivered to him at his entry by appreciation, to be received in the same manner at the expiration of the lease -- he receiving payment for any increase of value within a stipulated extent? 
66. The desire of transmitting their estates to a long series of descendants arises very naturally in the minds of men who have enjoyed ample possessions under the protection of a well constituted government; and may, within certain limitations, deserve to be countenanced and promoted by the wisest legislature. It might be entitled, however, to more praise, as proceeding from a liberal spirit, and to more countenance of the laws, as highly favourable to the general welfare, if, instead of securing superfluous opulence to one favoured
line of representatives, the plan of such a settlement in tail had for its object to diffuse a moderate competency among a numerous tribe or family of descendants, and to provide that no one of the whole race shall be reduced to penury, but through their own extravagance, or indolent disposition. Both these intentions might be combined in the same scheme, by securing the present rent of the entailed estate to the lineal heir, at all events, and giving at the same time to all other descendants of the entailer, or of his ancestors, a right, when any lease fell vacant (the leases not exceeding three lives), to claim
possession of it in full property, at the last rent; or at the old rent, with the chance of being exposed to future claims of other descendants, regulated on the principles of the progressive Agrarian law: these claims being to take place only after all the farms of the estate had been given off by the first rule of entail, each to a particular descendant of the entailer or of his ancestors.

Those persons who having no near relations, or none worthy of their inheritance, are led to bestow their estates on hospitals and other public uses, might obviate the murmurs of their remoter kindred, and the ungenerous insinuations to which the memory of such public benefactors is sometimes exposed, by making such a provision as this, in favour of persons descended from the same ancestors with themselves.

67. In every opulent society there is gradually produced a considerable fund, which accumulates from time to time in the hands of beneficent and charitable
persons, and is ready to be applied, chiefly in the way of legacy and bequest, to the more urgent wants and occasions of the community, and to supply what the revenue of the State cannot be made to reach, or what its attention has overlooked. Churches, monasteries, universities, bridges, and hospitals of various kinds have successively become the objects of this well intended
munificence in Europe, and corresponding foundations have in like manner engrossed it among the nations of the East. In some countries these objects are so fully provided for that the bountiful stream of donations seems almost to have ceased to flow: but the effect is apparent only, not real; the public wealth continuing the same, the charitable fund will continue the same also, if new and worthy objects are presented to its bounty. Hereafter, perhaps, in enlightened nations, the independence of the plough may be numbered among
these objects, as worthy to partake of such beneficent endowments, after the demands of sickness, of declining age, and deserted infancy have been in some reasonable measure provided for. In such a country, he who would have bequeathed his estate to a hospital, had hospitals been wanted, may think of dividing it, in the first place, into freehold allotments of a single plough each, and bequeath the revenue thence arising, to be applied at certain periods, to be portioned out in freehold in the same manner.

68. Nor ought it to be supposed that some specimen of this equal property in land, some example of what good effects it might produce in a narrow district, is too great an effort to be expected from the ordinary liberality of private men, possessed of ample fortunes. He who possesses six or eight manors cannot be thought to deprive even his remotest posterity of any great share of their inheritance, should he at the present time divide one at least of these manors into small farms of a single plough, assigning each of them in perpetual property to the cultivator for such rent as he would consent to give for this perpetual right. Or were this one manor rendered subject to the options of a
progressive Agrarian law, the right of claiming settlements being restricted to persons born on other manors of the estate, such an institution could not fail to operate as a premium in raising the value of the estate. But honour alone, and the conscious satisfaction of having made a public-spirited and laudable attempt, would more than compensate, to men of such ample fortunes, the loss that may be supposed to arise from some diminution of a rent-roll.

In certain nations (though not in Britain) the Princes of the blood are possessed of revenues equal to those of sovereign states, without any civil or military establishment to maintain; and should they even neglect the
splendour of their retinue, and of their domestic court, still the public reverence would wait on the dignity of their exalted birth. Among these men, placed in an intermediate situation between sovereigns and subjects,
exempted from the claims that are made on the first, and from the family wants of the second, it might be expected that liberal and illustrious schemes, conducive to the good of mankind, might find patrons worthy of them, whom the necessity of a great expense would animate rather than deter. Men of noble minds might rejoice in the occasion of expending their great revenues
on some more dignified object than that frivolous luxury in which they are usually wasted; they might rejoice in the occasions of distinguishing themselves from the vulgar herd of subordinate princes, whom the sentiments of mankind rate only as a sort of furniture, pertaining to the state apartments of a great monarch's court.
Section VI
Of such examples and beginnings of Reformation as might be produced by the combined endeavours of private Persons

HE concurrence of liberal purposes with the power of carrying them into execution, is too rarely to be met with in particular men. It is probable,
however, that in proportion as this important object shall be attended to, canvassed, and more generally made known, great numbers in various countries will perceive that they are interested in having it elucidated
by experimental trial; and what the wealth of individuals cannot afford to attempt, the joint contribution of considerable numbers (as in many similar cases) if expended on judicious plans, may accomplish with ease.*

* The outlines of a voluntary subscription scheme for promoting the independence of agriculture, and securing the advantage to the subscribers' families, might be delineated in this manner. A hundred subscribers, at Pound100 each, form a capital to be laid out in the purchase of lands; these lands, as the leases expire, to be divided into allotments of a single plough each. All descendants of subscribers, males or married females, to be entitled, if they require it, to an allotment at a rent fixed by a jury, and on condition of residence and actual cultivation.

The produce of these rents to accumulate, and to be expended from time to time in purchasing lands to be divided in like manner. Precedence of claims among descendants of equal propinquity to the subscribers to be determined by lots. All allotments after 50 years' possession to be subject to claims of
smaller allotments of six acres each, if any candidates disappointed of the
large allotments choose to settle on so small a patrimony. A jury must in that case determine what rent is to be paid to the fund, and what to the first occupier of the allotments.

The usual subscription societies are formed to provide for widows or children an annual payment during life, or a sum of money to assist in beginning the world. The object of this one would be to provide for a long and increasing race of descendants an inheritance, if they stood in need of it, and that of the most valuable kind, being a fund on which the most salutary industry may be comfortably exercised.
70. Many societies are instituted in various parts of Europe for the encouragement of agriculture; but to promote it, by the most effectual of all means, the independence of the plough, seems far too arduous an undertaking to be pursued by them even in the way of trial and experiment alone, and far beyond the limits of their finances. Yet the hearts of liberal men are apt to expand in proportion to the greatness of the objects which present themselves; and the enthusiasm aroused by engaging in schemes of the highest importance, not without difficulty, is likely, above all things, to increase the numbers, the vigour and influence of these very laudable associations.


