                                  LETTER XIX.
                                    VENICE.
My dear Sir,
THE republic of Venice has existed longer than those of Rome or Sparta, or any other that is known in history. It was at first democratical; and their magistrates, under the name of tribunes, were chosen by the people in a general assembly of them. A tribune was appointed annually, to distribute justice on each of those islands which this people inhabited. Whether this can be called collecting all authority into one center, or whether it was not rather dividing it into as many parcels as there were islands, this simple form of government sufficed, in so small a community, to maintain order for some time; but the tyrannical administration of the tribunes, and their eternal discords, rendered a revolution necessary; and after long altercations, and many projects, the people, having no adequate idea of the only natural balance of power among three orders, determined that one magistrate should be chosen, as the center of all authority  --  the eternal resource of every ignorant people, harrassed with democratical distractions or aristocratical encroachments. This magistrate must not be called king, but duke, and afterwards doge; he was to be for life, but at his death another was to be chosen; he was to have the nomination of all magistrates, and the power of peace and war. The unbounded popularity and great real merit of Paul Luc Anafeste, added to the pressure of tribunary tyranny, and the danger of a foreign enemy, accomplished this revolution. The new doge was to consult only such citizens as he should judge proper: this, instead of giving him a constitutional council, made him the master; he however sent polite messages to those he liked best, praying that they would come and advise him. These were soon called pregadi, as the doge's council is still called, though they are now independent enough of him. The first and second doge governed mildly; but the third made the people repent of their confidence: after serving the state by his warlike abilities, he enslaved it; and the people, having no constitutional means to restrain him, put him to death in his palace, and resolved to abolish the office. Hating alike the name of tribune and of doge, they would have a master of the militia, and he should be annually eligible. Factions too violent for this transient authority arose; and, only five years after, the people abolished this office, and restored the power of the doge, in the person of the son of him whom in their fury they had assassinated. For a long course of years after this, the Venetian history discloses scenes of tyranny, revolt, cruelty, and assassination, which excite horror. Doges, endeavouring to make their power hereditary, associating their eldest sons with them in office, and both together oppressing the people; these rising, and murdering them, or driving them into banishrnent, never once thinking of introducing a third order, between them and their first magistrate, nor any other form of government by which his power or theirs might be limited. In the tenth century, a son of their doge took arms against his father, but was defeated, banished, and declared incapable of ever being doge; yet no sooner was the father dead, than this worthless son was elected, and brought back in great pomp to Venice: he became soon a tyrant and a monster, and the people tore him to pieces, but took no measure to frame a legal government. The city increased in commerce, and by conquests, and the new subjects were not admitted to the privileges of citizens: this accession of dominion augmented the influence of the doge. There was no assembly but that of the people, and another called the council of forty, for the administration of justice. This body, in the twelfth century, formed something like a plan of government.
Although the descendants of the ancient tribunes and doges were generally rich, and had a spontaneous respect shewn to the antiquity of their families, they were not properly a nobility, having no legal rights, titles, or jurisdictions. As any citizen might be elected to a public office, and had a vote in the assemblies, it was necessary for the proudest among them to cultivate the good will of the multitude, who made and murdered doges. Through all these contests and dissensions among a multitude, always impatient, often capricious, demanding, at the same time, all the promptitude and secrecy of an absolute monarchy, with all the licence of a simple democracy, two things wholly contradictory to each other, the people had, to their honour, still maintained their right of voting in assembly, which was a great privilege, and nobody had yet dared to aim a blow at this acknowledged right of the people. 
The council of forty now ventured to propose a plan like that of Mr. Hume in his idea of a perfect commonwealth, and like that which our friend, Dr. Price, informs us was proposed in the convention of Massachusetts.
The city was divided into six districts, called sestiers. The council of forty proposed, that each of these partitions should name two electors, amounting to twelve in all, who should have the power of choosing, from the whole city, four hundred and seventy, who should have the whole power of the general assembly, and be called the grand council.
The people were amused with fine promises of order and regularity, and consoled with assertions that their right of election still continued, and that those who should not be chosen one year, might be the next; and, not perceiving that this law would be fatal to their power, suffered that aristocracy to be thus founded, which subsists to this hour. The next proposal was, that a committee of eleven should be appointed, to name the doge. Though the design of reducing the people to nothing might have been easily seen in these manoeuvres, yet the people, wearied, irritated, and discouraged, by eternal discords, agreed to both.
The council of forty, having thus secured the people, turned their eyes to the doge, whose authority had often been perverted to the purposes of oppression, and, having no legal check, had never been restrained but by violence, and all the confusions which accompany it. They proposed that a privy council of six should be appointed for the doge, one from each division of the city, by the grand council themselves, and that no orders should be valid without their concurrence: this passed into a law, with unanimous applause. They then proposed a senate of sixty, who were to be elected out of the grand council, and to be called the pregadi: this too was approved. The grand council of four hundred and seventy, the senate of sixty, the six counsellors, and eleven electors, were accordingly all chosen, and the last were sworn to choose a doge, without partiality, favour, or affection: and the new-chosen doge, having taken care to distribute money among the multitude, was received with universal acclamations. In his reign was instituted, by permission of the pope, the curious ceremony of wedding the sea, by a ring cast into it, in signum veri et perpetui imperii. Under the next doge the avogadors were instituted, to see that the laws were fully executed.
In the thirteenth century, six new magistrates, called correctors, were created by the senate, to enquire into all abuses during the reign of a deceased doge, and report them to the senate; and it was enacted, that the fortune of the doge should indemnify the state for whatever damage it had suffered during his administration: and these correctors have been appointed, at the decease of every doge since that time. In the next reign, a new tribunal of forty was erected, for the trial of civil causes. In the thirteenth century, a new method of appointing the doge, by the famous ballot of Venice, a complicated mixture of choice and chance, was adopted.
Each of the grand counsellors, now augmented to forty-one to avoid the inconvenience of an equal division, draws a ball out of a box, containing thirty gilt, and the rest white; those who draw the gilt ones go into another room, where is a box with thirty balls, nine of which are gilt; draw again, and those who obtain the gilt balls are the first electors; who choose forty, comprehending themselves in that number; the forty, by repeating the whole process, are reduced to twelve second electors, the first of whom names three, and the rest two a piece: these twenty-five draw again from as many balls, nine of which are gilt; this reduces them to nine third electors, each of whom chooses five: which forty-five are reduced, by a repetition of the ballot, to eleven fourth electors, and they have the appointment of forty-one, who are the direct electors of the doge. The choice generally turns upon two or three candidates, whose names are put into another box, and drawn out: the first whose name is drawn retires, and proclamation is made for objections against him; if any are made, he comes in, and is heard in his defence: then the electors proceed to determine by ayes and noes; if there are twenty-five ayes, he is chosen, if not, another name is read, and the same decision repeated, until there are twenty five in the affirmative.
The grand council, ever anxious to limit the power of the doge, soon thought it improper that the public acts should be signed by chancellors appointed by him, and accordingly determined to appoint this officer themselves.
The senate then began to think it too great a respect to the people to have the new doge presented to them for their acclamations, and ordained that a syndic should congratulate him in the name of the people on his election. The populace, who had weekly surrendered their rights, were very angry at being deprived of this show, and proclaimed a doge of their own; but he was afraid of the contest, and retired, and the people having no man of weight to head them, gave up this point.
The new doge, who had much contempt for popular government, and some resentment for the slight opposition he had met with, procured a law to be passed, that all the members of the grand council should hold their places for life, and transmit them to their posterity, and that their elections by the people's electors should cease. This establishment of an hereditary legislative nobility, no doubt shocked the citizens in general, but chiefly those of ancient families, who were not at that moment members of the grand council; to silence these, the most powerful of them were received into the grand council, and others were promised that they should be admitted at a future time. Commerce and wars soon turned the attention of the rest of the people from all thought about the loss of their privileges. Some few, however, some time after formed a plan, not to convene the people in a body, and new-model the constitution, but to assassinate the doge and council all together. The plot, which was carried on by the plebeians, was discovered, and the chiefs executed. Another originated amongst the nobles, some of them of the grand council, who being of very ancient families, could not bear to see so many citizens raised to a level with themselves, and others of the most distinguished of these, who were not of the grand council, and had not been received afterwards according to promise. This produced a skirmish in the city, but some of the conspiring nobles were killed, the rest routed, and many executed, but it was thought prudent to admit several of the most distinguished families. These two conspiracies produced a council of ten, upon which were afterwards engrafted the state inquisition.
Great care is taken in Venice, to balance one court against another, and render their powers mutual checks to each other. The college called the seigniory, was originally composed of the doge and six counsellors; to these were added six of the grand council chosen by the senate, and called the savii or sages; then five more for land affairs, and then five for sea affairs, in the room of whom, five young noblemen are now chosen every fix months, who attend, without a vote, for their education; to these were added the three chiefs of the criminal court, from a jealousy of the power of the college, which is both the cabinet council, and the representative of the state, giving audience and answers to ambassadors, to agents of towns, and generals of the army; receives all petitions, summons the senate, and arranges its business. 
There is one instance of a doge's concerting a conspiracy, to shake off the controul of the senate; but as it was an old man of fourscore, whose young wife, on whom he doted, was not treated with sufficient respect by the nobility, we need not wonder, that he had not sense enough to think of introducing a regular, well-balanced constitution, by a joint concurrence of the people, and the nobility: the whole plan was to massacre the grand council; and although he engaged in his design some of the highest officers, and a large party, the plot was discovered, the doge himself tried, condemned, and beheaded, as so infamous a piece of mad villainy justly deserved.
A punctual execution of the laws, is no doubt essential to the existence of this state, and there are striking instances of persons punishing their nearest relations, with the most unrelenting severity; without this, the doge on one hand, or the people on the other, would soon think of a union against the ruling nobility. The aristocracy is always sagacious, and knows the necessity of a rigorous impartiality, in order to preserve its power, and all the barriers we have described have been erected for this purpose: but all would be insufficient to restrain their passions, without the lions mouths and the state inquisitors; these were engrafted on the council of ten. This terrible tribunal, is sovereign in all crimes against the state; it consists of ten chosen yearly by the grand council; the six of the seigniory assist, and the doges preside when they please. Three chiefs, appointed monthly by lot, to open all letters, seize the accused, take examinations, and prosecute the prisoner; who is closely confined, allowed no council, and finally acquitted or condemned to death, in public or private, by the plurality of voices. This was the original tribunal, but it was not found sufficient, and the state inquisitors were erected in the beginning of the sixteenth century. This tribunal consists only of three persons, all taken from the council of ten, who have authority to decide, without appeal, on the life of every citizen, the doge himself not excepted. They employ what spies they please; if they are unanimous, they may order a prisoner to be strangled in gaol, or drowned in the canal, hanged in the night, or by day, as they please; if they are divided, the cause must go before the council of ten, but even here, if the guilt is doubtful, the rule is to execute the prisoner in the night. The three may command access to the house of every individual in the state, and have even keys to every apartment in the ducal palace, may enter his bed-chamber, break his cabinet, and search his papers. By this tribunal, have doge, nobility, and people, been kept in awe, and restrained from violating the laws, and to this is to be ascribed the long duration of this aristocracy.
Such are the happy effects of the spirit of families, when they are not bridled by an executive authority, in the hands of a first magistrate on one hand, and by an assembly of the people in person, or by adequate representation, on the other. Such are the blessings which, in course of ages, spring from a neglect in the beginning, to establish three orders, and a perfect balance between them. There can be, in the nature of things, no balance without three powers. The aristocracy is always more sagacious than an assembly of the people collectively, or by representation, and always proves an overmatch in policy, sooner or later. They are always more cunning too than a first magistrate, and always make of him a doge of Venice, a mere ceremony, unless he makes an alliance with the people to support him against them. What is the whole history of the wars of the barons but one demonstration of this truth! What are all the standing armies in Europe, but another. These were all given to kings by the people, to defend them against aristocracies. The people have been generally of Mr. Turgot's mind, that balances, and different orders, were unnecessary, and, harassed to death with the domination of noble families, they have generally surrounded the thrones with troops to humble them. They have succeeded so far as generally to make the nobles dependent on the crown, but having given up the balance which they might have held in their own hands, they are still subject to as much aristocratical domination, as the crowns think proper to permit. In Venice, the aristocratical passion for curbing the prince and the people, has been carried to its utmost length. It is astonishing to many, that any man will accept the office of doge. These sagacious nobles, who always know at least the vices and weaknesses of the human heart better than princes or people, saw that there would be generally vanity enough in an individual to flatter himself, that he had qualities to go through his administration without incurring censure, and with applause; and farther, that the frivolous distinction of living in the ducal palace, and being the first man in the nation, though it were only the first among equals, would tempt most men to risque their lives and fortunes, and accordingly it has so happened. There has been an uncommon solicitude all along to restrain his power: this no doubt was to prevent him from a possibility of negotiating with the people against them: on the other hand, there has been uncommon exertions to annihilate every power, every hope in the people: this was to prevent them from having a legal possibility of applying to the doge for assistance. All this together, would not however have succeeded, if death, in the shape of the inquisition, had not been made to stare both doge and people in the face, upon the first thought of conferring together.
The nobles are divided into six classes. 1. Twelve of the most ancient families. 2. Four families that in the year 880 subscribed to the building of the abbey of St. George. 3. Those whose names were written in the golden book, in 1296. 4. Those that were ennobled by the public in 1385. 5. Those who purchased their nobility for one hundred thousand ducats in 1646. And 6. The strangers who have been received into the number of nobility: the whole make about two thousand five hundred.
There are four councils: 1. The doge and six signoria. 2. The consiglio grande, in which all the nobles have seats and voices. 3. Consiglio de pregadi, of 250, and is the soul of the republic. 4. Consiglio proprio delli dieci  --  and the state inquisitors.
          THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNITED PROVINCES OF THE LOW COUNTRIES. 
HERE were a Stadtholder, an assembly of the States General, a council of state: the Stadtholder hereditary had the command of armies and navies, and appointment of all officers, &c. 
Every province had an assembly besides, and every city, burgomasters, counsellors, and schepens or judges, besides an hooft officer, and his dienders, for the police.
The history of this country, and its complicated constitutions, affords an inexhaustible store of materials to our purpose, but, considering the critical situation of it, prudence dictates to pass it over: with all the sagacity, and more wisdom than Venice or Berne, it has always had more consideration of the people than either, and has given more authority to the first magistrate: they have never had any exclusive preferences of families or nobles. Offices have, by law at least, been open to all men of merit.
                                  LETTER XX.
                                   ENGLAND.
My dear Sir,
POLAND and England. The histories of these countries would confirm the general principle we contend for: the last especially. But who can think of writing upon this subject after De Lolme, whose book is the best defence of the political balance of three powers that ever was written.
If the people are not equitably represented in the house of commons, this is a departure in practice from the theory.  --  If the lords return members of the house of commons, this is an additional disturbance of the balance: whether the crown and the people in such a case will not see the necessity of uniting in a remedy, are questions beyond my pretensions: I only contend that the English constitution is, in theory, the most stupendous fabrick of human invention, both for the adjustment of the balance, and the prevention of its vibrations; and that the Americans ought to be applauded instead of censured, for imitating it, as far as they have. Not the formation of languages, not the whole art of navigation and ship building, does more honour to the human understanding than this system of government. The Americans have not indeed imitated it in giving a negative, upon their legislature to the executive power; in this respect their balances are incompleat, very much I confess to my mortification: in other respects, they have some of them fallen short of perfection, by giving the choice of some militia officers, &c. to the people  --  these are however small matters at present. They have not made their first magistrates hereditary, nor their senators: here they differ from the English constitution, and with great propriety.
The Agrarian in America, is divided into the hands of the common people in every state, in such a manner, that nineteen twentieths of the property would be in the hands of the commons, let them appoint whom they could for chief magistrate and senators: the sovereignty then, in fact, as well as morality, must reside in the whole body of the people; and an hereditary king and nobility, who should not govern according to the public opinion, would infallibly be tumbled instantly from their places: it is not only most prudent then, hut absolutely necessary, to avoid continual violence, to give the people a legal, constitutional, and peaceable mode of changing these rulers, whenever they discover improper principles or dispositions in them. In the present state of society, and with the present manners, this may be done, not only without inconvenience, but greatly for the happiness and prosperity of the country. In future ages, if the present states become great nations, rich, powerful, and luxurious, as well as numerous, their own feelings and good sense will dictate to them what to do: they may make transitions to a nearer resemblance of the British constitution, by a fresh convention, without the smallest interruption to liberty. But this will never become necessary, until great quantities of property shall get into few hands.
The truth is, that the people have ever governed in America: all the weight of the royal governors and councils, even backed with fleets and armies, have never been able to get the advantage of them, who have always stood by their houses of representatives in every instance, and carried all their points; and no governor ever stood his ground against a representative assembly; as long as he governed by their advice he was happy; as soon as he differed from them he was wretched, and soon obliged to retire.
                                  LETTER XXI
                                    POLAND.
My dear Sir,
THE king of Poland is the first magistrate in the republic, derives all his authority from the nation.  --  He has not the power to make laws, raise taxes, contract alliances, or declare war, nor to coin money, nor marry, without the ratification of the diet.
The senate is composed of the clergy and nobility; the third estate, or people, is not so much as known. The grand marshal, the marshal of the court, the chancellor, vice chancellor, and the treasurer, are the first senators.
The nobility, or gentry, possess the dignities and employments, in which they never permit strangers, or the commonalty, to have any participation: they elect their king, and would never suffer the senate to make themselves masters of this election. The peasants are slaves to the gentry; having no property, all their acquisitions are made for their masters, and are exposed to all their passions, and are oppressed with impunity.
The general diets, which are usually held at Warsaw or Grodno, are preceded by particular assemblies of palatinates, in which the deputies are chosen for the general assembly, and instructed: the deputies assembled in general diet, proceed to the election of a marshal, who has a very extraordinary power, that of imposing silence on whom he pleases; he is the chief or speaker of the assembly.
At the death, abdication, or deposition of a king, the primate calls the assembly of the electors to an open field near Warsaw. Here the electors take an oath, not to separate until they shall have unanimously elected a king, nor to render him when elected any obedience, until he has sworn to observe the Pacta Conventa, and the laws.
The candidates must let their gold glitter, and give splendid entertainments, which must be carried into debauch: the nobility are captivated, with the attractions of magnificence and Hungarian wine, and infallibly declare in favour of the candidate who causes it to flow in the greatest profusion. The ambassadors enter upon intrigues, even in public: the nobility receive their presents, fell their suffrages with impunity, and render the throne venal, but often behave with little fidelity to the candidate in whose interest they pretend to be engaged, and, forgetting the presents they have received, espouse the cause of a more wealthy competitor without hesitation. When the candidate has gained all the suffrages, he is declared king, and sworn to observe the Pacta Conventa, and the laws, and then crowned. The Poles are polite and friendly, but magnificence is the foible of the nobility, and they sacrifice all things to luxury: as they seldom see any person superior to them in their own country, and treat their inferiors with an air of absolute authority, they live in all the splendor of princes. This is the account of the Abbe des Fontaines in the year 1736; it is to be hoped things have since changed for the better, but if this account was then true, who can wonder at what has happened since.
Here again is no balance; a king, and an assembly of nobles, and nothing more: the nobles here discover their unalterable disposition, whenever they have the power, to limit the king's authority; and there being no mediating power of the people, collectively or representatively, between them, the consequence has been, what it always will be in such a case, confusion and calamity.
                                 LETTER XXII.
                                    POLAND.
My dear Sir,
SINCE the letter concerning Poland was sent you, Mr. Coxe's travels into that kingdom, &c. have fallen into my hands: and they contain so many facts material to our argument, that it is very proper to send you the substance of this account; indeed there is scarcely a book in the world, in any manner relative to the history of government, or to those branches of philosophy on which it depends, which is not much to our purpose.
In the most ancient times, which records or history elucidate, the monarchy of Poland, like all others denominated feudal, was in theory, and pretension, absolute. The barons too, in this country as in all others, were very often impatient under such restraint. When the prince was an able statesman and warrior, he was able to preserve order; but when he was weak and indolent, it was very common for two or three barons in conjunction to make war upon him; and sometimes it happened that all together leagued against him at once. In every feudal country, where the people had not the sense and spirit to make themselves of importance, the barons became an aristocracy, incessantly encroaching upon the crown, and, under pretence of limiting its authority, took away from it one prerogative after another, until it was reduced down to a mere doge of Venice, or avoyer of Berne; until the kings, by incorporating cities and granting privileges to the people, set them up against the nobles, and obtained by their means standing armies, sufficient to controul both nobles and commons.
The monarchy of Poland, nearly absolute, sunk in the course of a few centuries, without any violent convulsion, into an aristocracy.
It came to be disputed whether the monarchy was hereditary or elective, and whether its authority was sovereign or limited. The first question is resolved, by supposing that the crown continued always in the same family, although, upon the death of a king, his successor was recognized in an assembly of the nobles. The second, may be answered by supposing, that when the king was active and capable, he did as he pleased; but when he was weak, he was dictated to by a licentious nobility. Cassimir the Great retrenched the authority of the principal barons, and granted immunities to the lesser nobility and gentry; well aware that no other expedient could introduce order, except a limitation of the vast influence, possessed by the Palatines or principal nobility. If this prince had been possessed of any ideas of a free government, he might easily have formed the people and inferior gentry into an assembly by themselves, and, by uniting his power with theirs, against the encroachments of the nobles upon both, have preserved it. His nephew, Louis of Hungary, who succeeded him, being a foreigner, was obliged by the nobility to subscribe conditions at his accession, not to impose any taxes by his royal authority, without the consent of the nation, that is of the nobles, for no other nation is thought on: that in case of his demise without male heirs, the privilege of appointing a king should revert to the nobles. In consequence of this agreement Louis was allowed to ascend the throne: having no son, with a view of insuring the succession to Sigismund his son in law, he promised to diminish the taxes, repair the fortresses at his own expence, and to confer no offices or dignities on foreigners.
Louis died: but Sigismund was emperor, and therefore powerful, and might be formidable to the new immunities. The Poles, aware of this, violated the compact with Louis, neglected Sigismund, and elected Ladislaus, upon his ratifying Louis's promises, and marrying his daughter.
Ladislaus, having relinquished the right of imposing taxes, called an assembly of prelates, barons, and military gentlemen, in their respective provinces, in order to obtain an additional tribute. These provincial assemblies gave birth to the Dietines; which now no longer retain the power of raising money in their several districts, but only elect the nuncios or representatives for the diet.
Ladislaus the third, the son of the former, purchased his right to the succession, during the life of his father, by a confirmation of all the concessions before granted, which he solemnly ratified at his accession. Cassimir the third, brother of Ladislaus the third, consented to several further innovations, all unfavourable to regal prerogative.  --  One was the convention of a national diet, invested with the sole power of granting supplies. Each palatinate or province was allowed to send to the general diet, besides the Palatines and other principal barons, a certain number of nuncios or representatives, chosen by the nobles and burghers. Is it not ridiculous, that this reign should be considered by the popular party, as the æra, at which the freedom of the constitution was permanently established? This freedom, which consists in a king without authority; a body of nobles in a state of uncontrouled anarchy; and a peasantry groaning under the yoke of feudal despotism: the greatest inequality or fortune in the world; the extremes of riches and poverty, of luxury and misery, in the neighbourhood of each other; a universal corruption and venality pervading all ranks; even the first nobles not blushing to be pensioners of foreign courts; one professing himself publicly an Austrian, another a Prussian, a third a Frenchman, and a fourth a Russian; a country without manufactures, without commerce, and in every view the most distressed in the world.  --  But to proceed, with an enumeration of the measures by which they have involved themselves in these pitiable circumstances:
Cassimir was involved in several unsuccessful wars, which exhausted his treasures: he applied to the diet for subsidies.
Every supply was accompanied with a list of grievances, and produced a diminution of the royal prerogative. The barons, at the head of their vassals, were bound to fight, and the king could require such feudal services in defence of the kingdom: but Cassimir the third, to obtain pecuniary aids, gave up the power of summoning the nobles to his standard, and of enacting any law without the concurrence of the diet. John Albert, to procure an election in preference to his elder brother, assented to all the immunities extorted from his predecessors, and swore to their observance, in 1469. Alexander, his successor, declared in 1505, the following limitations of sovereign authority to be fundamental laws of the kingdom. 1. The king cannot impose taxes. 2. He cannot require the feudal services. 3. Nor alienate the royal domains. 4. Nor enact laws. 5. Nor coin money. 6. Nor alter the process in the courts of justice. Sigismund the first, succeeded Alexander, and under his reign the Polish constitution was the most tolerable, as the property of the subject was best secured, and the crown had considerable influence: but this did not satisfy the nobles. Under Sigismund Augustus, son and successor of Sigismund the first, that favourite object of the Polish nobles, the free election of the king, was publicly brought forward, and the king obliged to agree, that no future monarch should succeed to the throne, unless freely elected by the nation: before this, the sovereigns upon their accession, though formally raised by the consent of the nation, still rested their pretensions upon hereditary right, always stiling themselves heirs of the kingdom of Poland. Sigismund Augustus was the last who bore that titles at his death, in 1572, all title to the crown from hereditary right was formally abolished, and the absolute freedom of election established upon a permanent basis: a charter of immunities was drawn up at a general diet, a ratification of which it was determined to exact of the new sovereign, prior to his election. This charter, called pacta conventa, contained the whole body of privileges obtained from Louis, and his successors, with the following additions: 1. That the king should be elective, and that his successor should never be appointed during his life. 2. That the diets, the holding of which depended solely upon the will of the kings, should be assembled every two years. 3. That every nobleman or gentleman in the realm should have a vote in the diet of election. 4. That in case the king should infringe the laws and privileges of the nation, his subjects should be absolved from their oaths of allegiance. From this period the pacta conventa, occasionally enlarged, have been confirmed by every sovereign at his coronation.
Henry of Valois, brother of Charles the ninth of France, who ascended the throne after the constitution was thus new modelled, secured his election by private bribes to the nobles, and by stipulating an annual pension to the republic from the revenues of France. His example has been followed by every succeeding king, who, besides an unconditional ratification of the pacta conventa, has always been constrained to purchase the crown by a public largess, and private corruption. Such is Polish liberty, and such the blessings of a monarchy elective by a body of nobles.
Under Stephen Bathori, the royal authority, or rather the royal dignity, was farther abridged, by the appointment of sixteen senators, chosen at each diet, to attend the king, and to give their opinion in all matters of importance, so that he could not issue any decree without their consent. Another fatal blow was given to the prerogative in 1578, by taking from the king the supreme jurisdiction of the causes of the nobles: it was enacted, that without the concurrence of the king, each palatinate should elect in their dietines their own judges, who should form supreme courts of justice, called tribunalia regni, in which the causes of the nobles shall be decided without appeal, a mode which prevails to this day.
In the reign of John Cassimir, in 1652, was introduced the liberum veto, or the power of each nuncio to interpose a negative, and break up a diet, a privilege which the king himself does not enjoy. When the diet was debating upon transactions of the utmost importance, which required a speedy decision, a nuncio cried out, "I stop the proceedings," and quitted the assembly: and a venal faction, who supported his protest, unheard of as it was, obtained the majority, and broke up the assembly in confusion. The constitution was thus wholly changed, and an unlimited scope given to faction. The innovation was supported by the great officers of state, the general, treasurer, and marshal, who being once nominated by the king, enjoyed their offices for life, responsible only to the diets, conscious that they could at all times engage a nuncio to protest, and thus elude an enquiry into their administration; it was also supported by the adherents of many nobles accused of capital crimes before the diet, the only tribunal before which they could be tried: all the nuncios who opposed the raising of additional subsidies by taxes, which the exigencies of the state then demanded, seconded the proposal of putting an end to the assembly. But the principal cause of all were the foreign powers, interested to foment confusions in the Polish councils. Before this, they were obliged to secure a majority; afterwards, they might put an end to any diet, unfriendly to their views, by corrupting a single member. This veto broke up seven diets in the reign of John Casimir, four under Michael, seven under John Sobieski, and thirty during the reigns of the two Augusti. In consequence of this necessity of unanimity, which they call the dearest palladium of Polish liberty, Poland has continued above a hundred years almost without laws.
But as the king still bestowed the starosties, or royal fiefs, which are held for life, and conferred the principal dignities and great offices of state, he was still the fountain of honour, and maintained great influence in the councils of the nation; but this last branch of the royal prerogative was lately wrested from the crown at the establishment of the permanent council. 
Thus it appears in the history of Poland, as in that of Venice, Genoa, Berne, Soleure, and all others, that the nobles have continued without interruption to scramble for diminutions of the regal authority, to grasp the whole executive power, and augment their own privileges; and have attained a direct aristocracy, under a monarchical name, where a few are above the controul of the laws, while the many are deprived of their protection.
The present wretched state of the towns, compared with their former flourishing condition; the poverty of the peasants, whose oppressions have increased in proportion to the power of the nobles, haying lost a protector when the king lost his weight in the constitution; the total confusion in all public affairs; the declension of importance, and loss of territory  --  all shew that absolute monarchy is preferable to such a republic. Would twelve millions of inhabitants, under an English constitution, or under the constitution of any one of the United States, have been partitioned and dismembered? No; not by a league of all the absolute sovereigns of Europe against them at once.  --  Such are the effects of collecting all authority into one center, of neglecting an equilibrium of powers, and of not having three branches in the legislature.
The practice of cantoning a body of soldiers near the plain where the kings are elected, has been adopted by several foreign powers for near a century; and, although it may be galling to the nobility, prevents the effusion of blood that formerly deluged the assembly. This was done, at the election of Stanislaus Augustus, by the empress of Russia and the king of Prussia; five thousand Russian troops were stationed at a small distance from the plain of Vola.
Stanislaus was in the thirty-second year of his age when he ascended the throne, in 1764. From his virtues and abilities, the fairest hopes were conceived of his raising Poland from its deplorable situation; but his exertions for the public good were fettered by the constitution, by the factions of a turbulent people, and the intrigues of neighbouring powers. His endeavours to introduce order at home, and independence abroad, which would have increased the power of his country, and her confederation with foreign nations, alarmed the neighbouring powers. The spirit of religious intolerance produced a civil war, and the senate petitioned the ambassador from Petersburg, not to withdraw the Russian troops. The royal troops, aided by the Russians, whose discipline was superior, were in favour of religious liberty. The Confederates, secretly encouraged by Austria, assisted by the Turks, and supplied with money and officers by the French, were able to protract hostilities from 1768 to 1772: during this period the attempt was made to assassinate the king.
Count Pulaski, who was killed in the service of the United States, is said to have planned an enterprize so much to his dishonour. No good cause ever was, or ever will be, served by assassination; and this is happily, in the present age, the universal sense of mankind. If a Papal nuncio was found in Poland, capable of blessing the weapons of conspirators against this tolerant king, he was a monster, whose bloody bigotry the liberal spirit of the Pope himself must, at this enlightened period, abominate. The king did himself immortal honour, by his intercession with the diet to remit the tortures and horrid cruelties decreed by the laws of most kingdoms in Europe against treason, and by his moderation towards all the conspirators.
We are now arrived at the consummation of all panegyrics upon a sovereignty in a single assembly  --  the Partition.
Prussia was formerly in a state of vassalage to this republic; Russia once saw its capital and throne possessed by the Poles; and Austria was indebted to John Sobieski, a sovereign of this country, for compelling the Turks to raise the siege of Vienna, but a century ago. A republic so lately the protector of its neighbours, would not, without the most palpable imperfections in the orders and balances of its government, have declined in an age of general improvement, and become a prey to any invader  --  much less would it have forced the world to acknowledge, that the translation of near five millions of people, from a republican government to that of absolute empires and monarchies, whether it were done by right or by wrong, is a blessing to them. The partition was projected by the king of Prussia, who communicated it to the emperor and empress. The plague was one circumstance, and the Russian war against the Turks another, that favoured the design; and the partition-treaty was signed at Petersburg, in February 1772, by the Russian, Austrian, and Prussian plenipotentiaries. The troops of the three courts were already in possession of the greatest part of Poland, and the Confederates were soon dispersed. The partitioning powers proceeded with such secrecy, that only vague conjectures were made at Warsaw, and that lord Cathcart, the English minister at Petersburg, obtained no authentic information of the treaty until two months after its signature The formal notification, to the king and sen are at Warsaw, was made, by the Imperial and Prussian ambassadors, in September 1772, of the pretensions of their courts to the Polish territory. The remonstrances of the king and senate, as well as those of the courts of London, Paris, Stockholm, and Copenhagen, had no effect; and the most humiliating record, that ever appeared in the annals of a republic, is seen in the king's summons  --  "Since there are no hopes from any quarter, and any further delays will only rend to draw down the most dreadful calamities upon the remainder of the dominions which are left to the republic, the diet is convened for the 19th of April, 1773, according to the will of the three courts; nevertheless, in order to avoid all cause of reproach, the king, with the advice of the senate, again appeals to the guarantees of the treaty of Oliva." It is not to be doubted, that if there had been in Poland a people in existence, as there is in Holland, to have given this amiable prince only the authority of a stadtholder, he would have said, "I will die in the last ditch."
Of the dismembered provinces, the Russian, which is the largest territory, contains only one million and a half of souls; the Austrian, which is the most populous, contains two millions and a half; the Prussian, which is the moil commercial, commanding the navigation of the Vistula, contains only eight hundred and sixty thousand, and has given a fatal blow to the commerce of Poland, by transferring it from Dantzick to Memel and Konigsburg.
The finishing stroke of all remains.  -- 
The three ambassadors, on the 13th of September, 1773, delivered, "A part of those cardinal laws, to the ratification of which our courts will not suffer any contradiction.
"I. The crown of Poland shall be for ever elective, and all order of succession proscribed: any person who shall endeavour to break this law shall be declared an enemy to his country, and liable to be punished accordingly.
"II. Foreign candidates to the throne, being the frequent cause of troubles and divisions, shall be excluded; and it shall be enacted, that, for the future, no person can be chosen king of Poland, and great duke of Lithuania, excepting a native Pole, of noble origin, and possessing land within the kingdom. The son, or grandson, of a king of Poland, cannot be elected immediately upon the death of their father or grandfather; and are not eligible, excepting after ah interval of two reigns.
"III. The government of Poland shall be for ever free, independent, and of a republican form.
"IV. The true principle of said government consisting in the strict execution of its laws, and the equilibrium of the three estates, viz. the king, the senate, and the equestrian order, a permanent council shall be established, in which the executive power shall be vested. In this council the equestrian order, hitherto excluded from the administration of affairs in the intervals of the diets, shall be admitted, as shall be more clearly laid down in the future arrangements."
Thus the supreme legislative authority resides in the three estates of the realm, the king, the senate, and equestrian order, assembled in a national diet; but each estate has no negative upon the other, and therefore is no balance, and very little check. The great families and principal palatines will still govern, without any effectual controul.
The executive power is now vested in the supreme permanent council; but here neither have they any checks, all being decided by the majority, and the same principal families will always prevail. 
These august legislators have acknowledged the principle of a free republican government, that it consists in a strict execution of the laws, and an equilibrium of estates or orders: but how are the laws to govern? and how is the equilibrium to be preserved? Like air, oil, and water, shaken together in one bottle, and left in repose; the first will rise to the top, the last sink to the bottom, and the second swim between.
Our countrymen will never run delirious after a word or a name. The name republic is given to things, in their nature as different and contradictory as light and darkness, truth and falsehood, virtue and vice, happiness and misery. There are free republics, and republics as tyrannical as an oriental despotism. A free republic is the best of governments, and the greatest blessing which mortals can aspire to. Republics which are not free, by the help of a multitude of rigorous checks, in very small states, and for short spaces of time, have preserved some reverence for the laws, and been tolerable; but there have been oligarchies carried to such extremes of tyranny, that the despotism of Turkey, as far as the happiness of the nation at large is concerned, would perhaps be preferable. An empire of laws is a characteristic of a free republic only, and should never be applied to republics in general. If there should ever be a people in Poland, there will soon be a real king; and if ever there should be a king in reality, as well as in name, there will soon be a people: for, instead of the trite saying, "no bishop, no king," it would be much more exact and important truth to say, no people, no king, and no king, no people, meaning by the word king, a first magistrate possessed exclusively of the executive power. It may be laid down as a universal maxim, that every government that has not three independent branches in its legislature will soon become an absolute monarchy; or, an arrogant nobility, increasing every day in a rage for splendor and magnificence, will annihilate the people, and, attended with their horses, hounds, and vassals, will run down the king as they would hunt a deer, wishing for nothing so much as to be in at the death.
The philosophical king Stanislaus felt most severely this want of a people. In his observations on the government of Poland, published in the OEuvres du Philosophe bienfaisant, tom. iii. he laments, in very pathetic terms, the miseries to which they were reduced.
"The violences," says he, "which the patricians at Rome exercised over the people of that city, before they had recourse to open force, and, by the authority of their tribunes, balanced the power of the nobility, are a striking picture of the cruelty with which we treat our plebeians. This portion of our state is more debated among us than they were among the Romans, where they enjoyed a species of liberty, even in the times when they were most enslaved to the first order of the republic. We may say with truth, that the people are, in Poland, in a state of extreme humiliation. We must, nevertheless, consider them as the principal support of the nation; and I am persuaded, that the little value we set on them will have very dangerous consequences.  --  Who are they, in fact, who procure abundance in the kingdom? who are they that bear the burthens, and pay the taxes? who are they that furnish men to our armies? who labour our fields? who gather in the crops? who sustain and nourish us? who are the cause of our inactivity? the refuge of our laziness? the resource for our wants? the support of our luxury? and indeed the source of all our pleasures? Is it not that very populace that we treat with so much rigour? Their pains, their sweat, their labours, do not they merit any better return than our scorn and disdain? We scarcely distinguish them from the brutes, which they maintain for the cultivation of our lands! we frequently have less consideration for their strength, than we have for that of those animals! and too frequently we sell them to masters as cruel as ourselves, who immediately force them, by an excess of hard labour, to repay the price of their new slavery! I cannot recollect without horror that law which imposes only a fine of fifteen livres upon a gentleman who shall have killed a peasant.  --  Poland is the only country where the populace are fallen from all the rights of humanity; we alone regard these men as creatures of another species, and we would almost refuse them the same air which they breathe with us. God, in the creation of man, gave him liberty  --  what right have we to deprive him of it? As it is natural to shake off a yoke that is rough, hard, and heavy, may it not happen that this people may make an effort to wrest themselves from our tyranny? Their murmurs and complaints must, sooner or later, lead to this. Hitherto, accustomed to their fetters, they think not of breaking them; but let one single man arise, among these unfortunate wretches, with a masculine and daring spirit, to concert and foment a revolt, what barrier shall we oppose to the torrent? We have a recent instance, in the insurrection in the Ukraine, which was only occasioned by the vexations of those among us who had there purchased lands. We despised the courage of the poor inhabitants of that country  --  they found a resource in despair, and nothing is more terrible than the despair of those who have no courage. What is the condition to which we have reduced the people of our kingdom? Reduced by misery to the state of brutes, they drag out their days in a lazy stupidity, which one would almost mistake for a total want of sentiment: they love no art, they value themselves on no industry; they labour no longer than the dread of chastisement forces them; convinced that they cannot enjoy the fruit of their ingenuity, they stifle their talents, and make no essays to discover them.  --  Hence that frightful scarcity in which we find ourselves of the most common artisans! Should we wonder that we are in want of things the most necessary, when those who ought to furnish them, cannot hope for the smallest profit from their cares to furnish us! It is only where liberty is found, that emulation can exist."
It would be a pleasure to translate the whole; but it is too long. It is a pity that the whole people, whose misery he describes and laments, were not as sensible of the necessity of a less circumscribed royal authority.

