                                  LETTER XIV.
                                   LUCERNE.
My dear Sir,
THE canton of Lucerne comprehends a country of sixteen leagues long and eight wide, containing fifteen bailiwicks, besides several cities, abbays, monasteries, seigniories, &c. The inhabitants are almost wholly engaged in agriculture, and the exportation of their produce. Their commerce might be greatly augmented, as the river Reuss issues from the lake, panes through the town, and falls into the Rhine.
The city contains less than three thousand fouls, has no manufactures, little trade, and no encouragement for learning: yet the sovereign is this single city, and the sovereignty resides in the little and great council, having for chiefs two avoyers, who are alternately regents. There are five hundred citizens in the town, from whom a council of one hundred are chosen, who are nominally the sovereignty; out of this body are formed the two divisions, the little council, senate, or council of state, consisting of thirty-six members, divided into two equal parts of eighteen each, one of which makes choice of the other every half year. The whole power is actually exercised by this body, the two divisions of which administer the government by turns. They are subject to no controul, are neither confirmed by the sovereign council, nor by the citizens; the division which retires confirming that which comes in. As the vacancies in the senate are filled up by themselves, all power is in possession of a few Patrician families. The son succeeds the father, and the brother his brother.
The grand council consists of sixty-four persons, taken from the citizens, who are said to have their privileges; but it is hard to guess what they are, as the elections are made by the little and great council conjointly.
The administration, the police, the finances, and the whole executive power, is in the senate, which is constantly sitting.
The grand council is assembled only upon particular occasions, for the purpose of legislation. The senate has cognizance of criminal causes, but in capital cases the grand council is convoked to pronounce sentence: in civil causes an appeal lies from the senate to the grand council; but these appeals can be but mere forms, the same senators being in both courts.
As the senate constitutes above a third of the grand council, choose their own members, confer all employments, have the nomination to ecclesiastical benefices, two thirds of the revenues of the canton belonging to the clergy, their influence must be uncontroulable.
The two avoyers are chosen from the senate by the council of one hundred, and are confirmed annually. The relations of the candidates are excluded from voting: but all such checks against influence and family connections in an oligarchy are futile, as all laws are cyphers. There are also certain chambers of justice and police.
In some few instances, such as declaring war and making peace, forming alliances or imposing taxes, the citizens must be assembled and give their consent, which is one check upon the power of the nobles.
                                  LETTER XV.
                                    ZURICH.
My dear Sir,
THE canton of Zurich contains one hundred and fifty thousand souls, upon an area of forty miles by thirty, abounds in corn, wine, and all the ordinary productions of excellent pastures. Literature has been encouraged, and has constantly flourished in this country, from the time of Zuinglius to that of Geiner and Lavater. The inhabitants are industrious, their manufactures considerable, and their commerce extensive.
In the city is a public granary, an admirable resource against scarcity, and a magnificent arsenal well filled with cannon, arms, and ammunition, particularly musquets for thirty thousand men; the armour of the old Swiss warriors, and the bow and arrow with which William Tell shot the apple on the head of his son  -- 
Who with the generous rustics fate, 
On Uri's rock, in close divan, 
And wing'd that arrow, sure as fate, 
Which fix'd the sacred rights of man.
The sovereign is the city of Zurich. The sovereignty resides in the two burgomasters, in the little council composed of forty-eight members, and the grand council composed of one hundred and sixty-two members; all taken from thirteen tribes, one of which is of the nobles, and the other twelve of citizens.
Although there are twelve thousand souls in the capital, and one hundred and fifty in the canton, there are not more than two thousand citizens. In early times, when the city had no territory round it, or a small one, the citizens were in possession of the government; when they afterwards made additions by conquest or purchase, they still obstinately held this power, and excluded all their new subjects. It is an hundred and fifty years since a new citizen has been admitted: besides electing all the magistrates and holding all offices, they have maintained a monopoly of commerce, and excluded all strangers, and even subjects of the canton, from conducting any in the town. Such are commons, as well as nobles and princes, whenever they have power unchecked in their hands!
There is even in this commercial republic a tribe of nobles, who consider trade as a humiliation.
The legislative authority is vested in the grand council of two hundred and twelve, including the senate.
The senate consists of twenty-four tribunes, and four counsellors chosen by the nobles, to these are added twenty, elected by the sovereign council; making in all, with the two burgomasters, fifty: half of them administer six months, and are then succeeded by the rest. The burgomasters are chosen annually by the sovereign council, and one of them is president of each division of the senate, which has the judicial power, in criminal matters, without appeal, and in civil, with an appeal to the grand council.
The members of the senate are liable to be changed, and there is an annual revision of them, which is a great restraint.
The state is not only out of debt, but saves money every year, against any emergency. By this fund they supported a war in 1712, without any additional taxes. There is not a carriage in the town, except it be of a stranger.
Zurich has great influence in the general diet, which she derives more from her reputation for integrity, and original Swiss independence of spirit, than from her power.
                                  LETTER XVI.
                                 SCHAFFHAUSE.
My dear Sir,
THE sovereign is the city of Schaffhause. The citizens, about sixteen hundred, are divided into twelve tribes, one of which consists of nobles, and eleven are ordinary citizens.
The sovereignty resides in the little and grand councils.
The senate, or little council of twenty-five, has the executive power.
The great council, comprizing the senate, has the legislative, and finally decides appeals.
The burgomasters are the chiefs of the republick, and alternately preside in both councils.
Besides these there are, the secret council, of seven of the highest officers; the chamber of justice, of twenty-five, including the president; the prætorian chamber, of thirteen, including the president; the consistory, of nine; and the chamber of accounts, of nine. The city has ten bailiwicks subject to it.
                             THE CITY OF MULHOUSE.
THE sovereign is the city: the sovereignty resides in the little and the grand council. The lesser council is composed of twenty-four persons; viz. three burgomasters, who preside by turns, each one six months, nine counsellors, and twelve tribunes, who succeed by election, and are taken from the grand council.
The grand council is composed of seventy-eight, viz. the twenty-four of the lesser council, thirty-six members of the tribes, six from each, and eighteen taken from the body of the citizens, and elected three by each one of the six tribes.
                              THE CITY OF BIENNE.
THE republick of Bienne contains less than six thousand souls.
The regency is composed of the great council, in which the legislative authority resides, consisting of forty members; and of the little council, composed of twenty-four, who have the executive.
Each of these councils elect their own members, from the six confraternities of the city.
The burgomaster is chosen by the two councils, presides at their meetings, and is the chief of the regency; he continues in office for life, although he goes through the form of an annual confirmation by the two councils, when the other magistrates submit to the same ceremony. The burgomaster keeps the teal, and, with the banneret, the treasurers, and the secretary, forms the oeconomical chamber, and the chamber of orphans.
This town sends deputies to the general diets. ordinary and extraordinary. 
                                 LETTER XVII.
                           THE REPUBLIC OF ST. GALL.
My dear Sir,
THE republic of St. Gall is a league and a half in circumference, and contains nine thousand souls. The inhabitants are very industrious in manufactures of linen, muslin, and embroidery, have an extensive commerce, and arts, sciences, and literature, are esteemed and cultivated among them. They have a remarkable public library, in which are thirteen volumes of original manuscript letters of the first reformers. To see the different effects of different forms of government on the human character, and the happiness and prosperity of nations, it would be worth while to compare this city with Constance, in its neighbourhood.
This happy and prosperous, though diminutive republic, has its grand council of ninety persons, its little council of twenty-four, and three burgomasters. The little council consists of the three burgomasters, nine senators, and twelve tribunes. The grand council consists of all the little council, and eleven persons from each tribe; for the city is divided into the society of the nobles, and six tribes of the artisans, of whom the weavers are the principal. 
Besides these there are, the chamber of justice, the chamber of five, and some others.
                                    GENEVA.
IN the republic of Geneva, the sovereignty resides in the general council, lawfully convened, which comprehends all the orders of the state, and is composed of four sindics, chiefs of the republic, presidents of all the councils; of the lesser council of twenty-five; of the grand council of two hundred, though it consists of two hundred and fifty when it is complete; and of all the citizens of twenty-five years of age. The rights and attributes of all these orders of the state are fixed by the laws. The history of this city deserves to be studied with anxious attention by every American citizen. The principles of government, the necessity of various orders, and the fatal effects of an imperfect balance, appear no where in a stronger light. The fatal slumbers of the people, their invincible attachment to a few families, and the cool deliberate rage of those families, if such an expression may be allowed, to grasp all authority into their own hands, when they are not controuled or over-awed by a power above them in a first magistrate, are written in every page. I need only refer you to Dr. d'Ivernois's Historical and Political View of the Constitution and Revolutions of Geneva in the Eighteenth Century, which you received from the author, to convince you of this.
Let me add here, that the facts relating to the Swiss cantons, and their environs, mentioned in these letters, are taken from the Quarante Tables Politiques de la Suisse, par C. E. Faber, Bernois, Pasteur, à Bishviller, in 1746; with some additional observations from the beautiful Sketches of Mr. Coxe, which I send you with this letter; and which you will find as instructive as they are entertaining.
The petty council is indifferently called the council of twenty five, the petit council or the senate.
The council of sixty is a body elected by the senate, and meets only for the discussion of foreign affairs.
The grand council, and council of two hundred, are one and the same body; it is still called the council of two hundred, though it now consists of two hundred and fifty members.
The general council, called indiscriminately the sovereign council, the general assembly, the sovereign assembly, the assembly of the people, or the council general, is composed of all the citizens or freemen of twenty-five years of age.
At the time of the Reformation, every affair, important or trifling, was laid before the general assembly; it was both a deliberating and acting body, that always left the cognizance of details to four sindics: this was necessary, in that time of danger, to attach the affections of the citizens to the support of the commonwealth by every endearing tie. The city was governed by two sindics of its own annual election. The multiplicity of affairs had engaged each sindic to nominate some of the principal citizens to serve as assessors during his administration; these assessors, called counsellors, formed a council of twenty-five persons. In 1457 the general council decreed, that the council of twenty-five should be augmented to sixty. This body, in 1526, was augmented to two hundred.
Thus far the aristocratical gentlemen proceeded upon democratical principles, and all is done by the general assembly. At this instant commences the first overt act of aristocratical ambition.  --  Warm in their seats, they were loth to leave them, or hold them any longer at the will of the people. With all the subtlety, and all the sagacity and address which is characteristic of this order of men in every age and nation, they prevailed on the people to relinquish for the future the right of electing counsellors in the general assembly, and the people, with their characteristic simplicity, and unbounded confidence in their rulers when they love them; became the dupes, and passed a law, that the two councils should for the future elect, or at least approve and affirm, each other. This is a natural and unavoidable effect of doing all things in one assembly, or collecting all authority into one center. When magistrates and people meet in one assembly, the former will for ever do as they please, provided they proceed with any degree of prudence and caution. 
The consequence was, that the annual reviews were a farce; only in a very few instances, for egregious faults, were any excluded: and the two councils became perpetual, and independent of the people entirely. The illusions of ambition are very subtle: if the motives of these magistrates, to extend the duration of their authority, were the public good, we must confess they were very ignorant. It is most likely they deceived themselves as well as their constituents, and mistook their own ambition for patriotism: but this is the progressive march of all assemblies; none can confine themselves within their limits, when they have an opportunity of transgressing them. These magistrates soon learned to consider their authority as a family property, as all others in general, in similar circumstances, ever did, and ever will.
They behaved like all others in another respect too: their authority being now permanent, they immediately attack the sindics, and transfer their power to themselves.
The whole history of Geneva, since that period, follows of course: the people, by their supineness, had given up all balances, and betrayed their own privileges, as well as the prerogatives of their first magistrates, into the hands of a few families.
The people of Geneva, as enlightened as any, have never considered the necessity of joining with the sindics, nor the sindics that of joining the people, but have constantly aimed at an impossibility, that of balancing an aristocratical by a democratical assembly, without the aid of a third power. 
                                 LETTER XVIII.
                                    LUCCA.
My dear Sir,
THE government of this republic is said to be purely aristocratical; yet the supreme power is lodged in the hands of two hundred and forty nobles, with the chief magistrate at their head, who is called confalloniero, or standard-bearer, and has the executive power. This magistrate is assisted by nine counsellors, called amziani, whose dignity lasts but nine months; he has a life-guard of sixty Swiss, and lives in the republic's palace, as do his counsellors, at the public expence: after six years he may be rechosen. The election of all officers is decided in the senate by ballot.
                                    GENOA.
THE legislative authority of Genoa is lodged in the great senate, consining of seniors, or the doge and twelve other members, with four hundred noblemen and principal citizens, annually elected. All matters of state arc transacted by the seniors, the members of which hold their places for two years, assisted by some other councils; and four parts in five of the senate must agree in passing a law. The doge is obliged to reside in the public palace the two years he enjoys his office, with two of the seniors, and their families. The palace where he resides, and where the great and little council, and the two colleges of the procuratori and gouvernatori assemble, is a large stone building in the center of the city. At the expiration of his time, he retires to his own house for eight days, when his administration is either approved or condemned; and in the latter case, he is proceeded against as a criminal. At the election of the doge, a crown of gold is placed on his head, and a sceptre in his hand, as king of Corsica; he is attended with life-guards, is clothed in crimson velvet, and styled Most Serene, the senators Excellencies, and the nobility Illustrious. 
The nobility are allowed to trade in the wholesale way; to carry on velvet, silk, and cloth manufactures; and to have shares in merchant ships: and some of them, as the Palavacini, are actually the greatest merchants in Genoa.
The extent is about one hundred and fifty-two miles, the breadth from eight to twenty miles.

