                                 LETTER VIII.
                                     ZUG.
My dear Sir,
THE canton of Zug is small, but rich, and divided into mountains and plains. The sovereign is the city of Zug, and part of the country. It is divided into five quarters, which possess the sovereignty; the city of Zug is two, and the country three, Mentzingen, Egeri, and Bar. The government is very complicated, and the sovereignty resides in the general assembly of the five quarters, where each male person of fifteen years of age has admittance and a voice. It assembles annually, to enact laws, and choose their magistrates. Thus these five quarters make a body of a democratical republic which commands the rest of the canton. They furnish alternately the land amman, the head or chief of the state, who must always reside at Zug with the regency of the country, although he is chosen by the suffrages of all the quarters collectively. He continues three years in office when taken from the district of Zug, and but two when chosen from any of the others.
The council of regency, to whom the general administration of affairs is intrusted, is composed of forty senators, thirteen from the city, and twenty-seven from the country.
The city, moreover, has its chief, its council, and its officers apart, and every one of the other quarters has the same.
It is a total misapplication of words to call this government a simple democracy; for, although the people are accounted for something, and indeed for more than in most other free governments; in other words, although it is a free republic, it is rather a confederation of four or five republics, each of which has its monarchical, aristocratical, and democratical branches, than a simple democracy. The confederation too has its three branches; the general assembly, the regency of senators, and the land amman; being different orders tempering each other, as really as the house, council, and governor, in any of the United States of America.
                                  LETTER IX.
                                     URI.
My dear Sir,
THE canton of Uri, the place of the birth and residence of William Tell, shook off the yoke of Austria in 1308, and, with Switz and Underwald, laid the foundation of the perpetual alliance of the cantons, in 1315. The canton consists only of villages and little towns or bourgades, and the whole is divided into ten genossamen, or inferior communities. It has no city. Altdorf, where the general assembles are held, and the land amman and regency resides, is the principal village.
The land amman and the principal magistrates are elected in the general assembly, in which all the male persons of fifteen years of age have a right to a feat and a vote.
The senate or council of regency, in whom is vested the executive power, is composed of sixty members, taken equally from each genossamen, though they reside at the capital borough. From this council are taken all the necessary officers.
There are two other councils; one called the chamber of seven, and the other the chamber of fifteen, for the management of lesser affairs.
The valley of Urseren, three leagues in length and one in breadth, marches under the banners of Uri a but it is but an ally, connected by treaty in 1410. It has its proper land amman and council, and has also a bailiwick subject to it.
The village of Gersaw is a league in breadth and two in length: there are about a thousand inhabitants. This is the smallest republic in Europe: it has however its land amman, its council of regency, and its general assembly of burgesses, its courts of justice and militia, although it is said there is not a single horse in the whole empire. Such a diminutive republic, in an obscure corner, and unknown, is interesting to Americans, not only because every spot of earth on which civil liberty flourishes deserves their esteem, but upon this occasion is particularly important, as it shews the impossibility of erecting even the smallest government, among the poorest people, without different orders, councils, and balances.
                                   LETTER X.
                                    SWITZ.
My dear Sir,
THE canton of Switz has the honour of giving the name to the whole confederation, because the first battle for independency was fought there: yet it consists only of villages divided into six quarters, the first of which is Switz, where the ordinary regency of the country resides. The sovereign is the whole country; that is to say, the sovereignty resides in the general assembly of the country, where all the males of fifteen years of age have a right of entry and suffrage.
Yet they have their land amman; and their ordinary regency, at which the land amman presides, composed of sixty counsellors, taken equally from the six quarters. All the necessary officers are taken from this council.
There are, besides, the secret chamber, the chamber of seven, and the chamber of nine, for finance, justice, and police.
                                  LETTER XI.
                           ARISTOCRATICAL REPUBLICS.
                             THE CANTON OF BERNE.
My dear Sir,
IT is scarcely possible to believe that Mr. Turgot, by collecting all authority into one center, could have intended an aristocratical assembly. He must have meant, however, a simple form of government of some kind or other; and there are but three kinds of simple forms, democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy. As we have gone through most, if not all, the governments in Europe in which the people have any share; it will throw much light upon our subject if we proceed to the aristocracies and oligarchies; for we shall find all these under a necessity of establishing orders, checks, and balances, as much as the democracies. As the people have been always necessitated to establish monarchical and aristocratical powers, to check themselves from rushing into anarchy; so have aristocratical bodies ever been obliged to contrive a number of divisions of their powers to check themselves from running into oligarchy.
The canton of Berne has no other sovereign than the single city of Berne. The sovereignty resides in the grand council, which has the legislative power, and the power of making peace, war, and alliances, and is composed of two hundred counsellors and ninety-nine assessors, the election of whom is made, by the seizeniers and the senate, from the citizens, from whom they are supposed virtually to derive their power; but a general assembly of the citizens is never called together, on any occasion, or for any purpose, not even to lay taxes, nor to make alliances or war. To be eligible into the grand council, one must be a citizen of Berne, member of one of the societies or tribes, and at least in the thirtieth year of his age.
The executive power is delegated by the grand council to the senate or little council, which is composed of twenty-seven persons, including the two avoyers or chiefs of the republic, the two treasurers of the German country, and of the pays de Vaud, and the four bannerets or commanders of the militia, taken from the four first tribes, for the four districts of the city. Vacancies in this senate are filled up by a complicated mixture of ballot and lot: twenty-six balls, three of which are gold, are drawn out of a box by the several senators; those who draw the golden ones nominate three electors out of the little council; in the same manner, seven members are designated from the grand council, who nominate seven electors from their body; these ten nominate ten candidates to be voted for in the grand council: the four of these who have the most votes, draw each of them a ball out of a box, which has in it two of gold and two of silver; the two who draw the gold arc voted for in the grand council, and he who has the most votes is chosen, provided he be married, and has been ten years in the grand council.
Vacancies in the grand council are filled up, at certain periods of about ten years, and two new members are appointed by each avoyer, one by each seizenier and senator, and two or three others by other officers of state: if there are more vacancies, they are filled by the election of the seizeniers and senators.
The seizeniers, who have this elective power, are drawn by lot from among those members of the grand council who have held the office of bailiff's, and who have finished the term of their administration. The bannerets and seizeniers have, by the constitution, an authority, for three days in Easter, resembling that of the censors in ancient Rome, and may deprive any member of cither council of his place; but, as their sentence must be confirmed by the great council, they never exercise their power. There are six noble families at Berne, who enjoy the precedence of all the other senators, although more ancient members, and have rank immediately after the bannerets.
The principal magistrates are, the two avoyers, who hold their offices for life; the two treasurers, who continue for six years; and the four bannerets, who remain only four. The avoyers officiate alternately a year; and the reigning avoyer, although he presides in council, in an elevated seat under a canopy, and has the public seal before him, has no vote except in cases of equal divisions, and never gives his opinion unless it is required. The avoyer, out of office, is the first senator and president of the secret council.
The secret council is composed of the avoyer out of office, the four bannerets, the two treasurers, and two other secret counsellors taken from the senate. In this body all affairs that require secrecy, and some of these are of great importance, are debated and determined.
The grand council assembles and deliberates by its own authority at stated times, and super-intends all affairs, although the most important are delegated generally to the senate. The whole administration is celebrated for its uncommon moderation, precision, and dispatch.
There are seventy-two bailiwicks, distributed in four classes, comprehending a country of sixty leagues in length, or a third part of all Switzerland, subject to this city. The bailiffs are appointed by lot from the grand council. They were formerly chosen, but this method rendering all the members dependent upon a few, who had the most influence, it had too strong a tendency to an oligarchy. The bailiwicks are the most profitable places, and are filled from the grand council. The bailiffs live in much splendour, and are able to lay up two or three thousand pounds sterling a year, besides discharging all their expences. They represent the sovereign authority, put the laws in execution, collect the revenues, ad as judges in civil and criminal causes; but an appeal lies to Berne, in civil causes to the courts of justice, and in criminal to the senate: but as the judges on appeal are persons who either have been or expect to be bailiffs, there is great reason to be apprehensive of partiality.
There is no standing army, but every male of sixteen is enrolled in the militia, and obliged to provide himself an uniform, a musket, powder and ball; and no peasant is allowed to marry, without producing his arms and uniform. The arms are inspected every year, and the men exercised. There are arsenals of arms at Berne, and in every bailiwick, sufficient for the militia of the district, and a sum of money for three months pay. The dragoons are chosen from the substantial farmers, who are obliged to provide their own horses and accoutrements. There is a council of war, of which the avoyer out of place is president, in peace; in war, a general is appointed to command all the forces of the state.
There is a political seminary for the youth, called the exterior state, which is a miniature of the whole government. The young men assemble and go through all the forms; they have their grand council, senate, avoyers, treasurers, bannerets, seizeniers, &c.: the post of avoyer is fought with great assiduity. They debate upon political subjects, and thus improve their talents by exercise, and became more capable of serving the public in future life.
The nobility in this country are haughty, and much averse to mixing in company, or any familiar conversation with the common people: the commons are taught to believe the nobles superiors, whole right it is to rule; and they believe their teachers, and are very willing to be governed.
                                  LETTER XII
                                   FRIBOURG.
My dear Sir,
THE canton of Fribourg is aristocratical, not having more than forty families, who can have any part in the government. These all live very nobly; that is to say, without commerce, manufactures, or trades.
The sovereignty and legislative authority resides in the council of two hundred persons, composed of the two avoyers, who are for life; twenty-two counsellors; four bannerets; sixty other counsellors, from whom the twenty-four who compose the senate, in which resides the executive power, are taken when they are to be replaced; and one hundred and twelve others, whom they call the grand senate of two hundred.
The two avoyers are elected by the plurality of suffrages of all the citizens. They hold their offices for life, and preside alternately a year. The twenty-two counsellors are also for life, and are designated by lot, as well as the bannerets, whose charges continue but three years. The sixty also are nominated by lot, and are drawn from the hundred and twelve, called the two hundred. There last come forward in the state by the presentation and nomination of the secret chamber, composed of twenty-four besides the bannerets, who are the chiefs of it. This chamber, which is sovereign, besides the right of nomination to the state, has alone that of correction, and of proposing regulations.
The two avoyers, the twenty-two counsellors, and the four bannerets, form the little senate, which hears and determines civil causes, and assembles every day.
The affairs of state are carried before the grand senate of two hundred. 
The tribes are corporations of tradesmen, who have no part in government, and who assemble in their abbays, only for the affairs of their occupations, and all their statutes are approved or rejected by the senate.
There are thirty-one bailiwicks subject to this canton. The method of determining the members of the little senate and secret council is another check. The names of the candidates in nomination are placed in a box, containing as many partitions as there are persons: the ballots are thrown into this box by the electors, without knowing how the names are placed; and the candidate whose name occupies the division, which receives by accident the most ballots, has the lot. This is to guard against the influence of families; for, among those few families from which alone any candidate can be taken, some have more influence than others. The canton contains sixty-six thousand souls. Its land produces good pasture, some corn, and little wine; it has no commerce, and not much literature. It has more troops in foreign service than any other canton in proportion. As the rivers and lakes have a direct communication with the sea, they might have a valuable commerce; but as none of the persons concerned in government can be merchants, no commerce can ever be in fashion, except that of their noble blood to foreign sovereigns. It is no doubt much to the honour of their fidelity and valour to be chosen so generally to be the life-guards of princes; but whether they can vindicate such a traffic, upon principles of justice, humanity, or policy, or from the imputation of a more mercenary spirit than that of ordinary commerce, is for them to consider. The conservation of the oligarchy is entirely owing however to this custom: for a youthful fiery nobility, at home in idleness, would necessarily become ambitious of popularity, and either procure, by intrigues and insurrections, a greater share of importance to the people, or set up one of the greatest genius and enterprize among them for a despot. In foreign service they exhaust their restless years, and return, after the deaths of their fathers, fatigued with dissipation, to enjoy their honours and estates; to support those laws which are so partial to their wishes; and to re-assume the manly simplicity of manners of their native country.
                                 LETTER XIII.
                                   SOLEURE.
My dear Sir,
THE canton of Soleure, seven leagues in breadth and twelve in length, contains fifty thousand souls, and the Patrician families are in quiet possession of all the public offices. The sovereign is the city of Soleure; and the sovereignty resides in the grand council, consisting of two avoyers, who preside alternately, and whose election depends upon the council, and all the citizens in general, who are divided into eleven tribes; of twenty-three of the thirty-three senators taken from the tribes, each of which furnishes three; and of sixty-six members who represent the citizens, and are taken also from the tribes in equal numbers, viz. six from each tribe.
The senate is composed of the two avoyers, and the thirty-three senators taken from the tribes, making thirty-five in all, who are called the little council, conduct the affairs of state, and judge causes civil and criminal. The two councils make together the number of one hundred, without computing the avoyer in office, who presides in chief. This body, named the grand council, makes laws and statutes; treats of alliances, peace and war; decides appeals in the last resort; elects the treasurer, the fourth in rank in the state, and the exterior bailiffs. The thirty-three senators consist of eleven alt-raths or senior counsellors, and twenty-two yunk-raths or juniors. Upon the removal by death of one of the alt-raths, the eldest of the yunk-raths succeeds him, and this vacancy is filled, out of the great council, by election of the eleven alt-raths. From among the alt-raths, the two avoyers, the banneret, and the treasurer, the four principal magistrates of the commonwealth, are chosen; and on the death of an avoyer, the banneret succeeds to his place, after having gone through the formality of a nomination by the general assembly of citizens. Vacancies in the grand council are supplied by the alt-raths, from the same tribe to which the deceased member belonged. There is an annual meeting of the whole body of the citizens, in which the avoyers and banneret are confirmed in their places: the senior and junior counsellors at the same time mutually confirm each other. All these confirmations are matters of course, and mere form. All other public employments are disposed of by the senate.
The revenues of the public, and salaries of offices, are very considerable, and afford the few distinguished families very profitable emoluments. The grand sautier is annually elected by all the citizens. There are several tribunals and chambers: the secret council, formed of the two avoyers, the banneret, the treasurer, the most ancient of the senators of the first order or alt-raths, the secretary of state, and attorney-general: the council of war: the council of justice, which is composed of six members of the little council, and eleven members of the grand council, one of whom is furnished by each tribe; the grand sautier presides in it, instead of the avoyer in office: the consistory, and the chamber of orphans. This canton has a large country subject to it, comprehending eleven bailiwicks.
The soil is extremely fertile, yet there is a want of hands for agriculture, and population decreases, although commodiously situated for commerce, they have none. These circumstances are enough to shew the blessings of a government by a few noble families. They shew another thing, still more curious; to wit, the consequences of mixing the nobles and commons together. The latter have here been induced to reduce their own constitutional share in the government to a mere form, and complaisantly to resign all the substance into the hands of those whom they think their natural superiors: and this will eternally happen, sooner or later, in every country, in any degree considerable for extent, numbers, or wealth, where the whole legislative and executive power are in one assembly, or even in two, if they have not a third power to balance them.
Let us by no means omit, that there is a grand arsenal at Soleure, as there is at Berne, well stored with arms in proportion to the number of inhabitants in the canton, and ornamented with the trophies of the valour of their ancestors.
Nor should it be forgotten, that a defensive alliance has subsisted between France and several of these cantons, for more than a century, to the great advantage of both. These republicans have found in that monarchy a steady, faithful, and generous friend. In 1777 the alliance was renewed in this city of Soleure, where the French ambassador resides; and extended to all the cantons. In the former treaty an article was inserted, that if any dissensions should arise between the cantons, his majesty should, at the request of one of the parties, interpose his mediation by all gentle means to bring about a reconciliation: but if these should fail, he should compel the aggressor to fulfil the treaties between the cantons and their allies. As this article was manifestly incompatible with that independence which republicans ought to value above all things, it has been wisely omitted in the new treaty; and it would have become the dignity of the Swiss character to have renounced equally those pensions, which are called Argents de Paix et d'Alliance, as inconsistent not only with a republican spirit, but with that equality which ought to be the foundation of an alliance.

