The hypocrite unmasked
November 11, 1780
   The moment I sacrifice the rights of Englishmen, and the common liberties of mankind, let me suffer the worst death that hell itself can invent, or that the super abundant mercy and piety of St. James's can inflict.
   Dissimulation and hypocrisy, under the mask of religion and liberty, have marked in a peculiar manner the character and the actions of Solomon the wise, who will no doubt be canonized in Rome, and handed down to posterity under the appellation of Pious the Third of glorious memory; at his death mass will be said by order of his Holiness the Pope, in every part of the world, when the mild and blessed religion of the mother church is known and practiced; invocations will be offered up to the Virgin Mary and a whole host of saints, for his departed soul.
   He will be afterwards invoked in his turn, by many devout Catholics, who never pray to God in their lives. Indeed, he will merit the title of saint, by more extensive mischiefs, fraud and massacres than many now in the Roman calendar.
   I have often thought that Pius the third would have made most excellent Lama of tartary, or Pope of Rome, for he has extended all the bounds of human cruelty and human misery, to gratify his revenge and thirst for power; he has been long employed in the godlike work of bloodshed, desolation and slaughter and carried pious wickedness as far as hypocrisy, craft and delusion could carry it. Many thousands of brave and virtuous men have fallen through his pretended piety and solemn professions of regard for the laws, the rights, the lives, and the happiness of mankind, which has ever been the common cant of every hypocrite and Imperial butcher, when slavery, misery and general ruin was intended.
    The Lama of Great Tartary, is a considerable monster, and described as a hideous one by Catholic writers, who adore the pope as a monster more complicated and terrible. This man is adored like Solomon the wise or Pious the third, not only by the inhabitants, but by all the kings of Tartary, who own a subjection to him in matters of religion; and therefore not only these kings, but their people, go in pilgrimage, with considerable gifts, to adore him as a true and living God. He, as a great favour shews himself in a dark place of his palace, adorned with gold and silver, and lighted by several hanging lamps, sitting upon a cushion of cloth of gold, on a place raised from the ground and covered with fine carpets. Then they all prostrate themselves flat on the ground, and humbly kiss his foot. Hence he is called father of fathers, high priest, and eternal father. Is this more ridiculous and superstitious than that of calling Pious the third sacred, and kissing his hand, which hundreds impiously do every year, and pay to him almost equal worship and adoration; but to return, the priests, who are the only persons who attend and wait on him upon all occasions, make the simple strangers believe wonders of his sanctity; (which is equal to Solomon's piety) and, that he may be thought immortal when he dies, they seek out, thro' all the kingdom for one very like him; and having found one, place him upon the throne, and make all the kingdom hold it as an article of faith (they being ignorant of the imposture) that the eternal father rose again out of hell, after 700 years, and has lived ever since, and will list to eternity; which, like the piety of the best of Kings, blazoned forth by the parricide's who support his hypocrisy, is deeply imprinted on the minds of those barbarous people, that no man amongst them makes the least doubt of it. They adore him so blindly, that he thinks himself completely happy, who has the fortune to get the least bit of his excrement, which is bought at a great price. They believe that by wearing it about their necks in a gold box, as the great lords used to do, it is a sure defense against all evils, and in and to devote against all diseases, and there are those who out of devotion put some of it into their meat. This living deity is of such great authority throughout Tartary, that no king is crowned till he has sent ambassadors with rich presents to obtain the great Lama's blessing, for a happy and prosperous reign.
   This is the character of the lama, who does pretty well as a pope of rude and savage Tartars, but is in reality, an innocent and limited cheat, compared to Pious the third, or to the lama of Rome, who like the other receives adorations; but in pretensions of power and mischief the other is a babe to them both.
   Thus other people in every part of the world imposed upon, deceived and ruined, by imposters and hypocrites. Pray where is the difference between kissing the lama's foot, the Pope's toe, or Pious the third's hand, they are all equally idolatrous, superstitious and disgraceful, and done from the same principle of adoration and worship through a suppose it superiority or power.
   The narrow soul, the selfish views, and the restless ambition of the best of Kings, would not let him govern a brave, a happy, and a free people in the full enjoyment of their liberty, he must be encroaching on their rights, destroying their freedom, and their peace, and attempting to murder the Constitution under which they lived.
   He assumed to himself a power of governing not by the known, ancient and established laws of the land, but according to his own arbitrary caprice, whim or will. And the moment he was opposed, in his attempts to destroy the Constitution of the Empire, the peace and liberties of mankind, the bloodhounds of war were let loose, fire and sword, desolation and slaughter was instantly the cry; thousands were inhumanely butchered by his orders, their habitations, and their country laid waste. And Pious the third did this out of the great regard and love he bore his people; for ye had always the welfare and happiness of all his subjects at heart; but his own supreme power, horrid blasphemy! and the supreme authority of the state, that is, the authority of those miscreant traitors whom he has enriched on the spoils of the people by rapine, plunder and blood, must be supported, so that the rights, the lives, the liberties and the property of more than three millions of people were to be destroyed by the high sound of those two great words, supreme authority, and in the midst of all this ruin of laws, this is sacrifice of humanity, justice and right; Pious the third, by dissimulation and hypocrisy has so far deceived the nation that he has hitherto found advocates to support his tyranny, and butchers ready to execute his bloody purposes, and indeed so does the great Turk, and every tyrant and usurper in the world, this put two fatally true that the worst kings and the greatest oppressors, always fine for hire, complacent and officious counselors, and the most wicked measures fine parracides to defend them.
    Had not Nero, had not Caligula, ministers and instruments as barbarous as themselves, to justify all the cruelties and barbarities, and even to advise and inspire them? Have not all the most bloody tyrants that have ever plagued the world or afflicted mankind, found such impious counselors and defenders. Indeed had there never been such advisers and instruments, there never could have been such mischievous and pernicious monsters.
   Muley Ishmael, Emperor of Morocco, was a descendent of Mahomet, and so exemplary for his adherence to the law of his prophet, that he abstained all his life from the taste of wine, began the annual feast, or lent, or ramadin, two months before his subjects, and was frequent in his prayers. What might not have been hoped from a prince of these endowments, had they not all been rendered useless to the good of his people, by the notion of that power they ascribes to him. This will appear, if we consider how he exercised it towards his subjects in those three great points, which are the chief ends of government, the preservation of their lives, the security of their property, and the determination of justice.
   This holy man is described by foreign envoys, mounted on horseback in an open court, with several of his alcaydes or governors of provinces about him, standing barefoot, trembling, bowing to the earth; and that every word he spoke, breaking out in passionate exclamations of praise, as great is the wisdom of our Lord the King, etc. Happy was the man, who was so much a favorite as to be sent on an errand to the remotest street in his capital; which he performed with the greatest alacrity, he ran through every puddle and took care to return out of breath and covered with dirt, that he might shew himself a diligent and faithful minister. His Majesty at the same time, to exhibit the greatness of his power, seldom dismiss the foreigner from his presence, till he had entertained him with the slaughter of two or three of his liege subjects, whom he very dexterously put to death with a tilt of his lance. St. Olon, the French envoy, tells us, that when he had his last audience of him, he received him in his robes just staying with the blood of two Moors he had been butchering with his own Imperial hands. By the calculation of that author and others, it is reckoned that with his own arms killed above 40,000 of his people. To render himself near awful, he chose to wear a garb of a particular colour when he bent upon execution. This prince was a great admirer of architecture, and employed vast numbers of works of that kind, if he did not approve the plan of the performance, it was useful for him to shew the delicacy of his taste by demolishing the building and put to death all that had a hand in it. He dispatched one of his queens whom he was very fond of, with a kick when she was big with child for having gathered a flower as she was walking in his pleasure garden. A favourite prime minister he bastinadoed to death, and afterwards repenting of the drugs he had given him when it was too late to manifest his esteem for the memory of so worthy a man, he executed the surgeon that could not cure him.
   To show that he was equally careful of the fortunes as the lives of his subjects, when any man grew rich, and already keep him from being dangerous to the state, he used to send for all of his goods and chattels. That he might make a right use of the prodigious treasures which flowed into him from all parts of his wide empire, he took care to bury them underground, by the hands of his many trusty slaves, and then cut their throats as the most effectual method to prevent discovery.
   His determinations of justice between man and man, were very summary and deceive and generally put an end to the vexations of lawsuit, by the ruin of both plaintiff and defendant. Such was the government of the pious Muley Ishmael, the servant of God. Happy is it for English meant that they live under a mild, just, and good King who was limited by, and makes the law of the land will of the conduct, who is an enemy to oppression and injustice, who despises hypocrisy and glories in the name of Briton.
