TO THE
Right Honourable LORD MANSFIELD,
CHIEF JUSTICE of ENGLAND.
My Lord,
I KNOW not to whom I could dedicate the following papers, with so much propriety as to your Lordship; who have upon every occasion, when the
constitution has been attacked by designing ministers, boldly stood forth in its defence, and supported with undaunted resolution and unequalled integrity the laws of England; who have nobly opposed every arbitrary and unconstitutional measure of government, during the course of this reign; and preserved the just rights of the people. You who have in your great mercy
always punished the guilty,  whereever you found them, and protected the innocent from lawless violence, and a military force. You who was greatly instrumental, in easing the pangs 'of an almost destracted father, by bringing to Justice the murderers of his Son. You who never would suffer the least delay in the execution of the law since your advancement to the King's-Bench. You, before whom, the perjurer, and the informer never dared to appear for fear of meeting from your Lordship's known regard for truth and justice, the punishment they deserve. You who have settled grand juries upon their antient foundation, and restored them to their original use and purity, so long, and so much wanting, your Lordship being convinced this is the principal guard of every man's life, liberty, and estate; for by the known laws, no subject
of this realm can be brought to the bar of justice, without the cause being first enquired into by a grand jury. You who have in your great goodness and love for justice, explained the power and right of petty juries to judge of law, as well as fact. You who have abolished, that infamous method of filing informations in the King's Bench, and obliging many of the best subjects of this kingdom to
answer at that awful tribunal, for no other crimes, but bravely daring to support the rights and privileges of Englishmen; for this noble stand against Star-chamber tyranny;  your Lordship deserves the united thanks of the whole nation. You who have such a degree of resolution, as never can be brought to swerve in the least from what you think to be law and justice. You who have
upon every great occasion, shewed an intrepid zeal in asserting the authority of the law. You who nobly ventured to incur the indignation of both houses of parliament, upon a matter of the last importance to the people of England, in favour of whom you gave a free, unbiassed, and constitutional opinion, concerning the Middlesex election. You whose integrity will not suffer You to deviate from judgment and truths even in compliance with the desires of your Prince. In a word my Lord, it requires the pen of a M' Pharson, a Home, or a Douglass, to do justice to your Lordship's merit and virtues, as a judge, a senator, and a most powerful advocate for public liberty. I must therefore subscribe myself, an equal admirer,  and defender of the laws and constitution of England with your Lordship, and the Publick's
much obliged, and most obedient servant,
William Moore.
December 18, 1770.

Preface
By Mr. Moore,
To the eight Letters which passes between the Duke of Grafton,
Lord North, and Himself. 

BEING ever desirous of rendering to my country all the services in my power; I had in December last after some trouble and expence, formed a scheme for
bringing into the government near 400,000l, annually by a tax, which I was and am persuaded is much wanted in order to preserve the lives, and properties of many thousand persons in this kingdom. I therefore drew up the plan of it, and immediately wrote the letter which follows this introduction,
to his Grace of Grafton, then first Lord of the Treasury, and in consequence of his answer I sent him the scheme. In about eight days after I received a very polite, but evasive kind of answer, with a reference to Lord North, before whom this matter (his Grace said) would come officially as Chancellor of the Exchequer. I wrote directly to his Lordship, but received no answer, I wrote a second letter and found myself no better off, I waited upon Lord North, he was busy; I therefore immediately dropped the further prosecution of this business, not chusing to be the lacquey of that despicable slave, who is no more than the wretched tool of the infamous Junto at Carlton House, with the King's mother at the head. Whatever distance, either chance, birth, or riches may have placed between  me and Lord North; there is still more, between him and his country; no subject can be so superior to me in rank, as this nation is above him in dignity; zeal then for the interest of England, and the
preservation of mankind, as well as common politeness should have obliged, Lord North, to have returned me some answer; but what is to be said for a man, lost to all sense of honour and honesty, overwhelmed in corruption; supporting his place in the administration upon the ruins of Public Liberty, and sacrificing the honour and interest of Great Britain, to the designs of its most persidious enemies; in a word, a man whose character cannot receive additional infamy or disgrace, whose name will be read with horror and detestation in the annals of England, and stigmatized to the latest times. 
To the Duke os Grafton..
My Lord Duke,
PERMIT me at a time when the distresses of the kingdom make it absolutely
necessary for every individual to exert himself, for the relief of his fellow subjects; to lay before your Grace, a plan for bringing into the treasury, the Sum of 300,000l. annually, by a tax entirely new and easy, a tax that can never bear the imputation of oppressive or burthensome, a tax that will be paid chearfully without a murmer, a tax if adopted and carried into execution by
administration will be a means of removing the odium at this time cast on the present ministry. I am firmly persuaded your Grace hath the good of your country too much at heart, to reject a proposal of this kind, though offered by a private individual. Resting assured that your Grace will (at least) give me a hearing. I shall be impatient for the honour of waiting on you, when I shall fully explain what I have to offer, which will prove; not to be a chimera, or
the invention of a fruitful imagination, but to be founded on good policy. I have the honour to be, my Lord Duke
Your Grace's most obedient,
and most humble servant, William Moore.
29th December, 1769.

To the Duke of Grafton,
My Lord Duke,
On Monday the 8th instant I had the honour of a card from your Grace, and
agreeable to your request, I now inclose the plan, (rather crude and indigested.) If any objections should be formed in the mind of your Grace concerning it, I shall be ready to remove them (if I am able) and whenever
you may be desirous of feeing me I shall attend your Grace with pleasure, I have the honour to be, my Lord Duke with much respect and esteem,
Your Grace's most devoted,
obedient and very humble servant,
WILLIAM MoORE.
16th January, 1770.

To the Right Honourable Lord North.
My Lord,
A FEW days since I laid before his Grace of Grafton, a plan for bringing into the government the sum of 390,220l. annually. His Grace returned me a very polite card, with assurances, that I should find a proper attention to it from your Lordship if I would apply to you upon it, by which I am led to infer, that his Grace hath shewn to you the paper I sent him, I should be glad to be informed, when I may have the honour of waiting on your Lordship, and whether it will be necessary for me to bring a copy of the paper I sent to his Grace. I have the honour to be my Lord with much respect,
Your Lordship's most obedient,
and most humble servant,
WlLLIAM MoORE.
23 January, 1770.

To Lord North,
My Lord,
I have waited with much impatience in expectation of an answer from your Lordship to my letter of the 23d instant, concerning a plan of a tax (entirely new) which will bring into the government the sum of 390,220l. annually. I am directed in my application to your Lordship by his Grace of Grafton, to whom I first communicated this matter. I only mention this now, because  I am doubtful whether the letter I sent to your Lordship on the 23d instant came to your hands. I am my Lord,
Your Lordship's most obedient
and very humble servant,
William Moore,
29th January,1770. 


To the Duke of Grafton.
My Lord Duke,
AGREEABLE to the directions in the card with which your Grace honoured
me, on the 20th of January, I wrote immediately to Lord North, acquainting his Lordship, that I had a plan to lay before him for bringing into the government 390,220 pounds annually, at the same time desiring to know when I might have the honour of waiting on his Lordship. My not having received any answer from Lord North, is the cause of my troubling your Grace once more upon this matter, being fully persuaded from the polite manner in
which your Grace hath been pleased to take notice of the paper I sent you, I shall receive some further instructions relative to this affair, which may be a means of bringing it to a final issue. Was I not firmly persuaded of the utility and justness of these taxes, and that they would give general satisfaction, I should not have presumed again, to write to your Grace. I beg leave, to add that I have now a scheme of another tax, which will amount to near three 
times the sum mentioned above, and shall with pleasure communicate it to your Graces or any of the ministry, provided I could be certain that some notice would be taken of it.
I am My Lord Duke with respect, 
Your Graces most devoted
and obedient Servant,
William Moore.  10th Feb. 1770

SATURDAY, February 17, 1770
All the genuine Particulars relative to the
Death of the late Lord Chancellor.
VARIOUS have been the reports relative to the death of the late Chancellor. Some will have it that he poisoned himself, others that he shot himself, others again that he broke his heart and died with vexation: but the following is the truth of the case, which the public may rely on. 
The premier had for some time been importuning him to except the seals, which he, fired with the principles of his noble family, had, with a spirit becoming a truly great man, often disdainfully refused. But as no one was
thought more adequate to the purposes of ministerial intrigues. No step was left unturned to bring him over. What could not be brought to bear with him, was effected through his wife; the Premier applied to her, the true sister of arbitrary measures, swelled with the thought of being the lady of almost the first subject in the kingdom, and anxious to have a peerage for her own son, as well as her son-in-law, for that was to be the price of his accepting them, took him in his soft hours of dalliance, the mollia ternfora fandi, and turned him to her purpose. She went immediately to the Duke of Grafton, made him acquainted with it, and told him she was convinced if his Majesty would fend for him, and ask it as a favour, he would no longer withstand. The thing was done, and he was sent for and closetted; the favour was asked, and the seals accepted. On his return home, he called on his friend the Marquis of Rockingham with whom he found Mr. Burke, and one or two of his old associates, who seemed pleased with the unexpected visit, but when he said " I have accepted the seals," it struck them all of a heap. They could not believe what they heard, but when they found it was too true; his friend, the Marquis, could hold no longer; and instantly addressed him thus. This spirited address was ecchoed by the whole company, and the Chancellor retired in disgrace.
The Marquis immediately flew to Lord Hardwick, the Chancellor's brother, told him the story, and urged to go and insist on his immediate resignation, (for Mr. York had great expectations from his brother,) Lord Hardwicke lost no time, but went to his house. Mr. York would fain have been excused, alledging he knew not what plea to make. If you have no plea of your own, continued he, " go tell the King your friends will not let you keep them." In short he hurried him away, saying he would wait his return. The Chancellor went, talked the matter over with his Majesty, but could not bring himself to give them. Loaded with reproach and shame, the upbraiding of his friends, and the aggravation of his wise, with whom he was heard on Friday evening in loud altercation, he could support himself no longer, but flung out of the room were they were together with a cast of wildness in his eye, and ran immediately up stairs; his lady suspecting something that might not be right, instantly followed him, and was in his chamber almost as soon; as he, but not time enough to prevent his cutting his Throat with a knife he took out of his
pocket as he was going up; he made an attempt also at cutting his wrists, but was not able to effect it thro' her interposition. As soon as she saw him bleeding she rung the bell and ordered her servant to fetch the first surgeon he could find; Mr. Langley of Gloucester Street was brought, and ho sewed up the wound, which at that time did not appear mortal. But so determined was he on his own death, that some time after, he threw back his head and burst the
stitches, which were again repaired. It was not long before several of the faculty were called in; he then seemed to have some little remorse for what he had done, and asked whether they thought he was quite out of danger; they replied he was provided he kept himself quiet and did not cough; however he could not avoid coughing, hurt himself some how or other, inwardly, and on Saturday evening died in the greatest agonies immaginable. 

March 10, 1770
Britons, awake! arise! at the voice of Liberty of Truth and Nature: this voice is sounding through England, and must be heard. Break the chains, which bind and disgrace you; Chains, that have been forged by tyranny us on the anvil of imposture.

AFTER the K had closeted, and prevailed on Mr. Y to accept the seals, he sent immediately for the D of G; and upon his entering the room, ran eagerly to
him, and said with an exulting kind of joy. Then, Sir, we are safe, replied the prostituted D, and shall be able to carry every thing agreeable to your will; there will be nothing wanting now, but a resolution in your M to support at all events the present ministry. They both gloried in the venal acquisition; and
the K told him he would, in spite of all opposition: even at the risque of his C and L.
The P D of W was immediately made acquainted with the great power, firmness, and resolution of her son, and almost fainted with excess of joy. The k saw her two or three hours after, when she expressed her approbation of what he had done, in these significant words,  G you are now worthy of being called my son. In this manner, the K, his M, and their minions, glory in their i, and seem determined to support, at the risque of their own security, and the peace of the English nation, the arbitrary and despotic measures they have adopted. Lord C was too honest for their purpose, he was violently forced out of his office; and the K corrupted the integrity of Mr. Y before he could be prevailed upon to succeed him. The complaints and grievances of the People are not thought worthy the K's notice, he acts by the advice of his M, and she insists upon it that he shall treat them with the contempt they deserve. Nay, she has even used threats; and explained to him the consequence of complying
with the requests of the people, after he had been previously consulted upon the M E, and passed his word, that he would support the M in it. She told him, if he gave way to these clamours he would certainly be deserted by those who meant to stand by him and by that means make himself appear infamous in the eyes of the world; and as for her, she should ever after hold him in the greatest contempt.
  The flattering tongue of this infernal Hecate has artfully insinuated itself into the favour of her son, (through his w) and by false lights drawn him into measures, and connexions, derogatory to the honour of his G, and ruinous both to his family and to his subjects: but he must be very deficient in capacity, either as a ruler, or a rational creature, should he continue deaf to the Remonstrances of a people who are the origin of his power, the source of his riches, and the natural defence of his person, C and dignity: and become like Richard the Second, who risked the affections of his subjects, and brought his dominions into contempt, by supporting, or conniving at the proceedings of Lord Chancellor Potsle, Chief Justice Trellilian, and the Duke of Ireland:
a wretched Ministry! men raised from mean estates by special favour, and advanced to the degree of Privy Counsellors. Men of venal and corrupt principals, and insfected with the insatiable itch of avarice, they despised the sovereign under whose authority they acted; neglecting the interest of the nation; exhausted the public treasure, and almost totally enslaved the people.
When these things were openly discovered, it was not the deep intrenchment of the Privy Council, nor those batteries, masked by the authority of the captivated King, that could defend them against the righteous lips of a perishing nation.
   Are the same proceedings in G the T and his Ministers to pass unnoticed, and the nation to be enslaved, at this day. Forbid it Heaven? The complaints of the people must be heard, their grievances must be redressed; if not, the C of England must expire under the miseries of anarchy; or the Liberties of the People perish in the horrible gulph of arbitrary power. If the K would but peruse, and seriously consider the reigns of his predecessors, and the
reigns of all former princes, he would clearly discern, that those, who placed their confidence in the affections of their people, and governed according to the established Laws of the land, were ever the most prosperous and happy; and that those, who through their own mistaken notions of government, or through the seducement of wicked ministers, (or wicked mothers) in order to escape the punishment due to their crimes, contended for an arbitrary power, and put their trust in mercenary troops, were always unhappy, inglorious, and infamous.
  Let the K look back to the times of Edward the Third, he will there see the miseries which attended that brave Prince in the first part of his Reign (when he was very young) through the treachery of his Mother, and the criminal connexion between her and Roger Mortimer, Earl of March; he will there find a striking picture of h, with this difference, Edward was wise and valiant, he is weak and p. He will there see his M and L B properly delinated. He will there see the unhappy condition of a Prince under the government of his mother. Let him exert the spirit of Edwards confine his M to a monastery, (where she may do Penance) and hang L B at Tyburn; then he will fulfill that part of his coronation oath, where he promises to cause law and justice to be executed in mercy and truth, in all judgments when required. 
The Whisperer would advise his M not to put any sort of dependance  in the address privately handed about by Sir L D, from S d, where they assure him, 30,000 S  are ready to assist him, and join the 3d R of G, whenever requested. Will not history afford his M numberless instances of mercenary armies setting aside the legal succession of Princes in a reigning family? Nay, of placing the Crown on the head of one of a different house. Besides, he must entertain a mean, and despicable opinion of the spirit, courage, and bravery
of the English nation, to believe that 30,000 rebellious S will ever be able to enslave this country. O, unhappy P, to be thus deluded, and deceived by the treachery of Scotchmen, and the artifices of your Mr. B assured, Sir, if you seek any power to destroy the liberties and constitution of this country, it
will prove fatal to yourself, and to your family. The people of England will not much longer remain passive under the present measures of government. How debased? how contemptible! must we be, should insensibility appear in the midst of universal desolation. 

The constitution of England has ever been in danger, and often suffered in the reigns of those kings, who were inclined to arbitrary government; but the danger has been still greater, and the consequences more fatal, in the reign of a weak and pusillanimous prince, whose abilities were not sufficient to discern between right and wrong, between the vilest lies of fawning favourites, and the most sacred truths and remonstrances of honest and disinterested men.
The vox populi will be a long time before it can reach the ear of such a prince, and when it does, either through weakness or obstinacy, he will not be easily prevailed upon to remove from his council a group of aspiring wicked ministers, who never fail to consult the passions and bent of his inclinations, rather than his interest, which must eternally be the fame with that of his people, and whoever presumes to separate them, or to establish a measure seemingly beneficial to one, and at the same time clashes with the interests of the other, must be an enemy to both. We have had many instances of ministers worming themselves into their master's favour, and flattering him into an opinion that he had interests in every respect different from those of his subjects. Such were the ministers so far back as King Vortigern, who
made that pusillanimous prince believe it would not be safe for him to depend upon the affection and loyalty of his natural born British subjects, to support and defend his crown and dignity, but to rely on the assistance of foreign mercenaries. 
The political maxim of such ministers is, that objects plain and simple are not fit for princes to behold: they will not suffer them to see things as they really are, but to view them through a ministerial medium, nicely adapted to the sine spun schemes of state jugglers, by which an administration the most wicked, venal and corrupt, may be supported; they will not let him see, they are for
pursuing arbitrary and unconstitutional measures, illegal and oppressive taxations, invading the sacred rights and liberties of the people; misapplying the public treasure, by bribing venal time-serving wretches to support their wicked schemes.
  They take care their prince shall not see or understand that all these measures are arbitrary strides and stretches of prerogative royal, beyond
the bounds of law, reason, and common justice, and that they are necessary to support them in their tyrannical system of government; on the contrary, they represent his subjects as ungovernable and seditious, given to change, and pretending to have a right to privileges, no way consistent with monarchical government.  These fallacious and wicked arguments they insinuate into the mind of a weak prince, the consequence is, they seldom fail to bring on a catastrophe fatal to their prince and to themselves, which was the cafe of king Vortigern and his ministers.
The ministers of King John were of the same stamp; they advised that prince to send for aid from Flanders and Bretagne, and to allot Norfolk and Suffolk for the support and maintenance of his pretended foreign friends j but the arm of Providence was fortunately extended in defence of this nation: not less than sixty thousand of those foreigners were overtaken by a tempest and
perished in their intended passage, to the great deliverance of the English nation; and it was happy for the king, his successors, and we that inhabit  this island; for in all probability had they landed safe, John's posterity would not have succeeded to the English crown, nor the present illustrious family been upon the throne.
   Charles the Second, a prince of greater abilities and penetration than either of the former, was likewise made to believe by flatterers, that he had an interest to support different from that of his people; and was really brought to think so; for after he had heard many heavy complaints against his favourite, the Duke of Lauderdale, in the privy council, and was asked what he now
thought of his Grace, immediately answered, "They have alledged many damned things he has done against his country, but none against my service."  --  In that he was grossly mistaken, for every thing done against his country proved in the end to be done against him and his family, which laid the foundation of the many evils this kingdom has since suffered. These instances one might reasonably imagine would have deterred any future ministers, even
for their own safety from steering a course so extremely dangerous to the king and kingdom, but so far from that, we have for some years seen administrations, formed one after another, under the influence of a Scottish favourite, or the vile dregs of his power, treading the fame steps, and
pursuing the same destructive measures.
  Riches,  trade, and commerce, are nowhere to be found but in the regions of freedom, where the properties and lives of the people are perfectly secure, under wise and wholsome laws, oppression and slavery being the greatest enemies to industry, art, and science. Who will manure and cultivate his land, without a moral certainty of reaping some advantage by it to himself and
family? will the manufacturer keep his looms employed, when the profits are not sufficient to support himself and dependants, when the materials of which the manufactory is composed are burthened with heavy and ruinous taxes, raised with no other design than to support interests diametrically opposite to the well being of the people, to feed the avarice and supply the wants of
a luxurious and corrupt administration ? we have borne many heavy taxes, and seen many encroachments on our liberties in the course of a few years: I need only mention two or three, the game-act is a notorious violation of the people's property;  --  the cyder-act was the most oppressive to the gentlemen and farmers of the cyder counties that has pasted for' many years, but they made a noble opposition to the instruments of their oppression.
   This country has long laboured under venal and corrupt administrations, almost beyond deicription  --  we all know it, we all feel it. Are we not obliged to bribery and corruption for passing so many unconstitutional acts, the confirmation of so many unconstitutional measures, and stretching the royal prerogative beyond its due bounds? such ministers are traitors to their sovereign, and enemies to their country, and by the constitution of England, have been ever deemed as such, and often brought to that disgrace and
punishment which their crimes deserved. It can be no excuse for them to say they have the sanction of parliament for their unjust measures, for that is only saying it is impossible the majority of a house of commons can be corrupt, or under the undue influence of a mal-administration. We all know, without going far back, that former representatives have been returned to parliament
by the most open and avowed bribery. Therefore, if the foundation is rotten, what can we expect of the superstructure. The civil list was but a short time since upwards of six hundred thousand pounds in debt, which proves to a demonstration what is here asserted, and shews how the entire approbation of the last venal and slavish parliament was obtained, when the preliminary
articles of the late infamous peace were laid before that house, which must draw the contempt of all mankind on the wretched negociators of
them, and will be an everlasting memorial of a weak, corrupt, and wicked administration. 

March 17, 1770.
Kings when they descend to Tyranny,
Dissolve the Bond, and leave the Subject free.
The plan of arbitrary power laid down by Lord Bute, and infused into the K
and his m more than ten years since, is now fully compleated, and effectually carried into execution. It is evident by the conduct of his M, that he intends to set himself above the laws; and his m has been assiduously labouring for some time to make her family absolute; nay, she has openly professed these intensions to her minions. Whether the people of England will submit to the chains now forging for them, or preserve themselves free, is at present the great doubt and alternative. It is to be hoped there is yet some virtue left in the nation and that Englishmen, fired with the noble spirit of their ancestors,will make use of that defence, which the laws of God and nature authorize.
The City of London have presented a Remonstrance to the King; but his M entertaining such high notions of kingly power, thought it beneath him to give any answer to it, at least only an evasive one. How long the people will
suffer themselves to be trifled with, laughed at, and insulted, by their chief m, is not easily to be determined; we will hope at least, that the reception which the City Remonstrance met with at St. James's, will not deter the free-holders of England from following the noble example of the livery of London. And if after all, the united complaints of the whole collective body of the people should fail; if their grievances should still remain unredressed, and the K
remain deaf to their cries; they will then have one remedy left, and a very effectual one; such a remedy as Charles, under the like circumstances, could not withstand, and James was forced .to give way to, and abdicate three crowns.
   A remedy, though desperate, yet it has been often found necessary, and never failed of its desired effect: a remedy, that must once more, if applied to the terrible disorders of the state, make the crown of England shake. Our forefathers gloriously and successfully struggled under the tyranny of Charles the first and James the second; they exerted the noble spirit of Englishmen, and threw off the yoke; and it must be from a bold exertion of the same principle at this time, that we can expect to be freed from the worst of all tyranny, that established by law. The most despotic tyrants of the house of Stuart were reduced to reason, and brought within the bounds of law; and it is a duty we owe our country and posterity to keep his present M within the same limits. He came to the crown of these realms by the general, the universal voice of the people, to rule over them under certain laws and restrictions; these laws he solemnly swore to observe, and to execute justice in mercy and truth. He was called to defend us against all invasions of our liberties as a free people. But far from the great end for which he was chosen, he has w and per y pursued measures which tend to the absolute destruction of the whole British- Empire; and entirely forgot his c oath, or wilfully committed p of the deepest dye.
   Camps for the army are now forming round the town, and we may soon expect, like the enslaved Americans, to be butchered at the will and pleasure of mercenary hirelings, by order of the K. The reign of Nero was a reign of
injustice, oppression, bloodshed and cruelty.
