SATURDAY, March 31, 1770
The celebrated Mons. de Montesquieu, in his L'Esprit des loix, speaking of the Liberty of the English nation says, it will be lost when the legislative shall become more corrupt than the executive power. That the day is now arrived I believe no dispassionate man will deny. The House of Commons have given the most striking proof of their m, s and c of any Parliament that ever existed
in this kingdom. The joint address presented to the King on friday the 23d instant by the Lords and Commons filled with the most fulsome ad, falsehood and hypocrisy will remain upon record, an everlasting memorial of their vanity; and must brand with infamy to the latest times, the names of those men who, could be mean enough, to sacrifice the liberties of England and the birthright of Englishmen, at the shrine of despotism, in compliance with the desires of a P.
   The King very modestly referred the remonstrance presented to him from the city of London, to both houses of parliament. The remonstrants complain of a violation of the right of election, of an undue influence and corruption in the house of commons, and that the delegates of the people had betrayed their trust, and praying a dissolution of the present parliament. Was not this artisice of the ___ and his ministers, the grossest insult ever offered by a Parliament  to the understanding of the English nation. 
   Will the same house of commons who voted the expulsion of a member elected and no way disqualified, who seated as a member of their house, a person not only never elected, but particularly obnoxious to those, he is pretended to represent, who found one lawyer to give his opinion there, in direct opposition to his own positive, written, printed opinion elsewhere, who found another lawyer base enough for a bribe, which enabled him to wind up his public course of iniquity, and to retire on the plunder of his country, to affirm the others judgment; contrary to his own knowledge and immediate conviction. Will this house of commons I say tread back its own steps, rescind its own resolutions, declare itself v, corrupt, unjust, and through repentance find its way to virtue? it is impossible, as soon shall lord Holland become poor and generous, the duke of B honest and humble; and the duke of Grafton, grateful and able; as soon shall lord Bute give up his country, lord S his whore, or mungo his impudence.  As soon ___ shall his make the laws of England
the rule of his conduct, the p d of ___ become chaste and virtuous, or the duke of C forget to be base and mean.
   Had the parliament, under James the second, been as ready to comply with the designs of that prince, as this parliament is to fall in with the views of his present ___ and his ministers, the people of this country would have been in a
state of slavery almost a century ago; had our forefathers been as passive at that time, as we their descendants are at this, we should have sufficient reason to curse the day of our birth, and it is really to be seared, unless a proper spirit is exerted upon the present occasion, against the arbitrary and tyrannical measures of government adopted by the ___ and his ministers, that our posterity will have but too much reason to lament that they were born, and to load us with the most severe reproach: and we shall be branded in the annals of this country by the faithful historian, as degenerate, dastardly and base, unworthy the name of Britons, and little deserving the character we at present bear throughout the world of being a brave and free people.
   Let me exhort you my fellow countrymen to defend your rights against the united efforts of king, lords, and commons, fix a resolution, determine to be free, or die gloriously, with the liberties of your country, let not the power of a
misguided and perverse ___ the pro of hereditary pee -- e, nor the corruption of the house of commons terrify you. Remember the first ___ is no more than the c of England, he was placed upon the throne by your favour,  you support him; you have intrusted him with every thing you hold dear and valuable, with your lives, liberties, and properties. He has abandoned that trust. The innocent blood of our fellow subjects has been cruelly and wantonly spilt. Our liberties destroyed, and the property of an individual has been taken from him. The second are made noble by the favour of princes in proportion to the injuries they have done their country, and the greatest part of them a burthen
to the nation. The third are no more than your agents, your attornies, you have for your own conveniency intrusted them to act for you, if they betray that trust, they are enemies, they are traitors to their country. Remember you are
engaged in the cause of liberty, the birthright of every man; in a cause that will do immortal honour to your memories; remember the day is arrived, there is no time to be lost, you must rise, you must exert yourselves.
   When peace and plenty smile upon a land, and things glide on like a gentle stream, with a smooth and unbroken course; a man who obeys the laws of his country, is justly reputed a good citizen. But is this a competent test, when the
scene is reversed; when a nation is distressed, its liberties subverted, and a dangerous and despotic power assumed, which threatens a destruction of
the whole constitution? no, such a crisis calls for a resolute and self-denying conduct; such times demand a sacrifice of every private interest to the
public good; and the man who has not virtue enough to make such a sacrifice; whatever he may think himself, is no better at the bottom than a disguised traitor. To survive then that integrity with which the liberty of my country
must be supported, would consign me to universal contempt. The preservation of property, was the chief end of men's uniting themselves into
commonwealths, under some particular form of government, and for the enjoyment of that property in peace and safety, it became necessary to
establish a legislative power; and upon such a foundation, that whilst the constitution or form of government continued the same, the legislative
should continue unaltered. And whether they by that original compact placed the legislative power in the hands of ten, thirty, or five hundred, it makes no difference. A constitution of some sort will be formed; a legislative power will
be established; they will go hand in hand, stand or fall together; and an alteration in the one, must be attended with the sure and certain destruction of the other.
   The frame of our government is made up of King, Lords, and Commons, which put together make but one entire government, though with respect to each other, they are seperate parts of the constitution. And the preservation of this form  of government in England, is owing to the care and virtue of our predecessors, who kept these three constituent parts of the political body,
close to the rules of their institution, by restraining each to their proper bounds. And however these three parts may in other respects be considered, yet in regard to the legislative, they must act in conjunction. The assent of each to the making of laws is absolutely necessary; but the manner of giving their assent is very different in the people, from what it is in the King and the
Lords. The people by reason of their numbers, cannot be personally present at the making of laws, their assent can no otherwise be given than by their representatives. The disadvantage the commons are under, in this respect, is in some measure made up to them by the care taken in forming our government; that they should be truly and fairly represented. But this great bulwark of the peoples liberties, the only guard they have against oppression and arbitrary power, has been destroyed by the corruption of ministers, who
place the success of their administration, and security of their persons, not in promoting the public welfare, but in securing a majority in the house of Commons, to approve their measures, to supply them with public money, and to screen them from national resentment. Who would believe till  --  that there could ever be found a nation whose senators, intrusted with the legislative power, were so divested of all honesty and shame, as to sell their country for any private emolument, and to hold a place, or a pension, or take a bribe, either to establish tyranny under the form of law, or to destroy that right on which depends the very being of the constitution,
   I presume by this time I am stigmatized with some odious name, and represented by the present ministerial faction to be a disaffected person,
and ready to join with the enemies of my country. This is generally their last resort, when they can, no longer cover their attempts upon our liberties. Call me jacobite and I will despise thee, call me rebel and I will answer thee. Remember rebellion is an opposition not to persons, but to the authority in being; and let me add, that the only way to destroy dissatisfaction, and to prevent rebellions and revolutions, the constant concommitants in England of evil counsels, and absolute,wicked measures, is by a wise administration and
just proceedings in the senate, to convince the people, that they shall find their account in obeying and maintaining the present establishment. For it may be experimentally asserted, that a people harressed by the instruments of tyranny, always suspect them; and will be desirous to get rid of them; who obstruct their ease and content, and, as it was in king James the second's days
they in like circumstances will be ready to make an interest with a new government, by betraying the old: and yet they shall no more deserve to be
branded with the epithets, rebellious or dissaffected, than they who fought for the liberties of England jn 1641, or placed King William on the throne
in 1688.
   Let the people of this country join heartily in preserving the constitution of the state, upon its true and solid basis. Let them unite in the support of the just rights of the crown, and at the same time defend their liberties; oppose all usurpations, and endeavour in the most legal manner, to detect and punish all who dare to interpose between the King and the subject, so as to interrupt the harmony, on which alone the happiness of both depend. And this should be done while there is an ardent desire, and diffusive love of liberty among the people. The people of this country, have frequently been reduced to bemoan the approaches of arbitrary power j and to complain of a usurpation upon their rights and privileges by corrupt ministers. Can any people remain silent when their representatives prostitute the power, committed to them by their constituents, for the public safety, to the vile purposes of enriching themselves, by sacrificing their trust to the will of a weak and wicked minion; such an unnatural traffic with their liberties, leaves only the name of freedom;
while by stow degrees, it brings on a lasting slavery. Or can a free constitution be out of danger, where one part of it attempts to destroy the energy of the other? or when the legislative power is corrupted by the executive. It was the
want of integrity in the members of parliament, who sacrificed the liberties of England to the will of Richard the second, and laid the foundation for those depopulating and cruel wars, with which this land was made a field of blood for almost two centuries. A free people, may for a while, be reduced to the necessity of submitting, when their freedom has been so artfully invaded, as not to be prevented; or so forcibly, as not to be immediately resisted; but history will inform us, that such invasions seldom go unrevenged. There is
no people that ever bound themselves over to another, without reserving a natural right to resist violent aggressors; and to use every legal method to
maintain and recover that liberty, and to punish those who oppress them, according to the nature of their offence. This nation will furnish too many examples, in which there have been ministers of state, who without any regard to the true interest of the king and subject, and the honour of the nation abroad; and indeed without consulting the fatal consequences thereof, have ventured to try the dangerous experiment: dangerous to themselves, fatal to the throne, when a majority could not be secured; and always ruinous to their country: the reigns of Charles the first, and James the second will afford sufficient proof.

SATURDAY, May 5, 1770
To the right honourable William Lord Mansfield, chief Justice of the court of King's Bench, and one of his Majesty's most honourable privy Council. 
My Lord,
TO address your lordship as the defender or supporter of public liberty, would
consign. me to universal contempt; and do an injury to my country that nothing but my blood could atone for. I shall therefore throw of all kind of disguise, represent you in your true colours, and speak nothing but truths, truths that can be justified by the whole English nation.
   The world allows you to be a great lawyer; but a most partial and arbitrary judge. Upon many occasions you have discovered your prejudice, your animosity, and your hatred against the people of England. You have abused the laws, perverted justice, and rendered yourself justly obnoxious throughout the whole British empire. When your opinion is asked upon any matter
between the King and the subject, you are sure to give it in favour of the court without scruple, however unjust, cruel, and oppressive; the life of an Englishman is of as little consequence to you, as the virtue of Lucretia was to Tarquin.  Your malice never shone more conspicuously than in a very recent instance, concerning two numbers of the Whisperer your opinion was asked and you gave one consistent with yourself; that they were treasonable throughout. William De Gray, Esq., Attorney-general, Mr. Wallace and several other council (in compliment to you) concurred with you in opinion; but to the honour, the immortal honour of John Dunning, Esq., who differed in Opinion from you, your execrable design to take away the life of an Englishman was not carried into execution; and the grand jury found a bill of indictment for a misdeameanour only. Your lordship held several consultations with the Attorney-general and others, upon the publication of Junius's letter to the King and the Whisperers; every record was searched both ancient and
modern in London and Middlesex to find a president, upon which you might convict the authors and publishers of treason, and by that means satiate the revenge of a Scotchman, which nothing could ever yet satisfy but the blood of
Englishmen. Unhappy Moore, to have incurred the displeasure of the gentle, the just, the pale Mansfield. The case of poor Matthews was at last hit upon, and urged with great force, but Mr. Dunning explained the unjustness and
cruelty in executing him, and said that it was always looked upon as a disgrace to humanity, and to this kingdom as a free country. Unhappy Mansfield to be thus disappointed in thy natural itch for English blood, and thy mirmodons to be disappointed too in their searches after me. Be assured my Lord they search in vain, I am now in a subterraneous cavern of the earth, and never make my appearance but once a week, disguised in a Scotch plod and bonnet,
the only security for an Englishman's liberty or life. I know your power my lord, and I know your abuse of it, but that shall not deter me from speaking truth; you may exert your utmost endeavours to prevent the discovery of
those acts you would wish to keep secret, and in the most arbitrary manner, suppress (if possible) every publication wherein your conduct is called in question; but while there is a hand able to write and a press open in the kingdom, Englishmen will write. Public liberty can never be supported without freedom of speech, it is the right of every man; this sacred privilege is so essential to a free government, that the security of property and freedom of speech, will stand or fall together.
   Whoever would destroy the liberties of this Country, must begin by subduing freedom of speech, a thing terrible to public traitors; this my lord you have attempted to do, but hitherto with little success. 
   In the reign of Charles the first to assert the undoubted rights of the people of England, and defend the King's legal prerogative, was called disaffection, and punished as sedition, and you my lord have made it equally dangerous at this time to tread in the steps of those virtuous men.
   By your partial adherence to the measures of a most despotic and corrupt administration, you have justly incurred the hatred of every honest man, who wishes to fee the laws remain in their full force, and the constitution of England unshaken.
   Magistrates ought to be well spoken of while they deserve it, but to do public mischief without hearing of it, is only the prerogative of a tyrant; every honest man would be desirous oft having his actions openly examined and publicly
scrutinized; it is only those who are wicked and unjust that dread what is said of them. In old Rome the people examined the pubic proceedings with such discretion, and censured those who administered them, with such equity and mildness, that during the space of three hundred years, not five public ministers suffered unjustly; but when the people proceeded to violence, those
in power had been the aggressors, it is guilt only my lord that dreads liberty of speech, which drags it out of its lurking holes, and exposes its deformity and horror to day-light.
   Old Spencer and his son, who were the vile, the infamous ministers and betrayers of Edward the second, would have been glad to have stopped the mouths, or shed the blood of every honest man in England. They my lord like
__ dreaded to be called traitors, because they were so. Sir Francis Walsingham that served Queen Elizabeth faithfully who deserved no reproaches, feared none. A misrepresentation of public measures is easily detected, by representing public measures truly; and when they are honest, they ought to be publicly known, that they may be openly commended, but if their are knavish or pernicious, they ought to be publicly exposed, that they and the authors of them may be publicly detested.
   If the earl of Strafford had not deserved to be impeached he need not have feared a bill of attainder. 
   Now my lord, if you and the rest of our present directors, are not such knaves as the world thinks you; prove to the whole world, that they think wrong, and that neither you, or they are guilty of those villanies which are laid to your charge.

   I can only laugh my lord at the stupidity of those judges and ministers, who think to extinguish by the terror of their power the memory of their actions. I will own exalted wickedness, is the safest. I could name an English reign, in
which for above nine years there scarce passed a week, that the prince did not venture his crown, and his ministers forfeit their heads, and yet none of these forfeitures were exacted; so corrupt and wicked was the government, and
so tame, and acquiescing were the people; but these things are obvious, yet how little are they considered: it is safer for a great man to rob a country than for a poor one to steal a loaf; the wages of villainy protect villains, and justice is only blind were the object is naked. This is one of those reigns, that slain the annals of English history. I should be glad to ask your lordship, if those judges and counsellors who adjudged a dispensing and lawless power to kings, had not the guilt, of a thousand private murderers upon their heads, they in manner signed a dead warrant for their country, and so does he who abuses justice, and endeavours to subvert the laws and constitution. This is unquestionably certain, that the least public guilt, is greater than the greatest private guilt and every man in a public capacity should confides this, that every step which, he takes, every speech he makes, every vote which he gives,
may effect millions. A good magistrate is the brightest character upon earth, but a bad one a greater monster than ever hell engendered, he is an enemy to his own species; where there is the greatest trust the betraying it is the greatest treason; every intention manifested by acts to destroy the constitution, or to subvert. The rights and liberties of the people, being so by the common law of England, as well as an attempt to destroy the person of the king or to dethrone him.
   The council of ten in Venice, have absolute power over the liberty and life of every man in the state; but if they should make use of that power, to slaughter, abolish, or enslave the senate, and like the Decemviri of Rome, to set up
themselves, would it not be lawful' for those who gave them that authority for other ends, to put those ten unlimited traitors to death, any way that they could. The Crown of England has been generally entrusted with the sole disposal of the money given for the civil list, and often with the application of great sums raised for other public uses; yet if the lord treasurer had applied this money to the dishonour of the king, and ruin of the people, (though by the private direction of the court itself) will any man say, that he ought to have compensated for his crime, by the loss of his head and his estate: and the right of the magistrate arises only from the right of private men, to defend themselves, to repel injuries, and to punish those who commit them? that right being conveyed by the society to their public representative, he can execute it no further than the benefit and security of that society requires he should; when he exceeds his commission, his acts are as extrajudicial as are those of any private officer, usurping an unlawful authority, that is, they are
void, for this reason, a power to do good can never become a warrant for doing evil.
   Yet my lord you are sensible, through the villany of our representatives and the corruption of judges, the people have suffered many heavy oppressions, and by the knavish designs of states-men, this nation has lost several glorious opportunities of rescuing the constitution, and settling it upon a firm and lasting foundation. Let me therefore warm my countrymen not by the like inattention, and supineness, loose the present favourable offer.  --  Machiavel tells us, that no government can long subsist, but by recurring often to its first principles; and this can never be done while men live at ease and in luxury, for then they cannot be persuaded to see distant dangers of which they feel no part. The conjunctures proper for such reformation are, when men are
awakened by misfortunes, and the approach and near view of present evils, then they will wish for remedies, and their minds are prepared to receive
them, to hear reasons, and fall into measures proportioned for their security. The great authority just quoted informs us what expedients are necessary to save a state under such circumstances he tells us, that as tyranny cannot be established but by destroying Brutus, so a free government is not to be preserved, but by destroying Brutus's sons; let us therefore put on a resolution equal to the mighty occasion; let us exert a spirit worthy of Britons, worthy of freemen, who deserve liberty.  --  Let us shew to the world that we are not to
be enslaved by your lordship, or any set of men. Let us take advantage of the present opportunity, while mens resentments boil high, against those who are the authors of the many arbitrary and destructive measures that have been projected and carried into execution. Let neither private acquaintance nor personal alliance, stand between, us and our duty to our country.

   Let all those who have a common interest in the public safety,  --  join in common measures to defend the public safety.  --  Let us persue to disgrace and destruction, those who have brought this ruin upon us let them be ever so great or ever so many. Let us stamp and deep engrave in characters legible to all Europe at present, and to all posterity hereafter, what vengeance is due
to crimes, which have no less objects in view, than the ruin of nations, and the destruction of millions. Many bold, desperate and wicked attempts have been made to destroy us. Let us strike one honest and bold stroke to destroy them.  --  Tho' the designs of the conspirators, should be laid deep as the center, tho' they should raise Hell itself, and should fetch legions of votaries from thence
to avow their proceedings, yet let us not leave the pursuit, till we have their heads and estates.
   Let us convince the world that Englishmen are no dastards, but that in cases of exigence, when they are pushed home, they can withstand every opposition, and dare to be couragious, when their enemies advance; many have been the instances, this country has given, when the people have risen superior to every oppression, and shewn themselves in the day of persecution. They have ever nobly withstood the Scotch, when they attacked this country in bodies, and have always routed them. Can it then be doubted, that they will ever give way to the opposition of an individual, one who has nothing to support him, but an
obstinate head, and a bad heart. Know my lord, tis virtue to gain ground here, 'tis the highest pitch of honour to dispute the sovereignty.  I am but an obscure man, a man of no great influence, but yet have spirit enough to struggle with contending oppression, and should think it the greatest honour of my life, could I free this country, either by argument or reproach, from the arbitrary proceedings of a Scotch chief justice; the minion of despotic measures. You have long been my lord, the bane of this nation, so have your family, rebels in loyalty, rebels in justice, tyrants in contention, tyrants in administration. Long will this nation rue your being at the head of the King's Bench! Long will they have reason to lament a discretionary power being put into your hands.  --  This unhappy country, has unfortunately seen a Jefferies, so has it a Mansfield.  --  Children yet unborn will be bound to curse your memory and the annals of England, where your name is mentioned will be a disgrace to all Europe, and
be stigmatized to the end of time. 


