THESE old tories, jacobites, necessitous Scotchmen, prostituted placemen and pensioners, are the wretches who meet regularly at Carlton-House, plan and carry into execution every measure of government, and govern this
kingdom with a rod of iron. The King is made the dupe, the tool of his mother and her creatures, and only bears the name of majesty, whilst she and her minions wear all the appendages to sovereignty. He, unhappy Prince! has neither courage nor resolution enough to extricate himself from this infernal league. Whatever he is told to say, he says. What he is bid to do, he does. Whatever he is desired to sign he signs without knowing what it is, only as he is informed by one of the junto; as a proof of these assertions, I need only mention, the last speech, the answer to the first remonstrance from the city of London; the warrants for the execution of petty thieves, and the pardons, and pensions granted to murderers. It is apparent to the whole kingdom, nay to the whole world, that he has not examined any matter of national importance, from the time he was seated on the throne of these realms to the present hour; the most artful and unfair representations of every business is made to him,
and he weak prince! takes every thing for granted, which is told him by his mother, and his ministers; or how could he be led to adopt a speech filled with the grossest, nay with the most notorious falsehoods. First his mother or
his minister has obliged him to say, "the season of the year, and the dispatch you have given to the public business, make it proper for me to put an end to this session of parliament;" what can be a more gross insult on the common understanding of this nation, than to assert, that the parliament gave dispatch to the public business, it is well known, it is notoriously known that dispatch was not given to the public business; nor indeed any the least attention paid to
a matter of the greatest, of the last importance to this kingdom, I mean the affairs of America.
   The next paragraph in this very absurd speech is as follows, "the temper with which you have conducted all your proceedings, has given me great satisfaction; and I promise myself the happiest effects from the firmness, as well as the moderation, which you have manifested in the very critical circumstance which have attended your late deliberations." I am persuaded every body believes his Majesty, the princess dowager of Wales, and the ministry received great satisfaction in all their proceedings, but the people
of this country will be bound to curse the proceedings both of the lords and commons to the end of time. In the third place his Majesty says, with respect to foreign affairs, I have nothing material to communicate to you. I will continue my endeavours to appease, if possible, the troubles which still prevail in some parts of Europe; or, at least, prevent them from spreading farther. In all events, it shall be my first and constant care, to watch over the interests,
and to preserve, undiminished the rights of my people," every Englishman must be fired with indignation against the author of this speech, who reads the last sentence in the above paragraph; can those wretched, those despicable
ministers, who now govern this kingdom, believe that the people will be much longer trifled with and insulted; can they, infamous and wicked as they are, can they say, that the rights of the people have been preserved undiminished,
no, the whole kingdom know it to be false, they know that the only essential right of the subject has been destroyed, by the venality and corruption of the present House of Commons and that his majesty instead of using his endeavours to redress the injured electors of this kingdom, has supported the House of Commons in their violation of the right of election. Conclusion of the junto's speech. "I must earnestly recommend to you to exert, in your respective counties, the same zeal and prudence that you have shewn in parliament, for promoting the peace and the welfare of the kingdom. Nothing can be so favourable to the wishes of those who look with jealousy on the strength and prosperity of this country, as the prevalence of animosities and dissentions amongst ourselves.
   Let it therefore be your care, to discountenance every attempt to infuse groundless suspicions and discontents into the minds of your fellow subjects.  --  Make them sensible of my constant attention to promote their happiness; and convince them, that nothing can so effectually secure their liberties, as the maintenance of every part of our excellent constitution in its due force and
authority.
   How finely the princess dowager and her minions have made the king pronounce his own panegerick,  "make them sensible of my constant
attention to promote their happiness; witness the massacre in St. George's Fields, and the letter of thanks sent by lord Barrington to the commanding officer upon duty there. Witness the murderers at Brentford, these will sufficiently shew the king's great desire to promote the happiness of his people; and convince them, that nothing can so effectually secure their liberties as the maintenance of every part of our excellent constitution in its due force and authority," that is they mean to maintain every part of the
constitution by a military power, as they have done for some time past, which in effect is destroying instead of preserving the constitution. 
   From the King's answer to the remonstrance, it is evident the people of this country can never expect to receive any redress; his Majesty by the advice of his mother and his ministers, seems determined to set up his own will in place of the laws; Therefore they have only this alternative, either quietly to be made slaves, or to seek redress with their own hands.
   Mr. Locke fays that the government is dissolved when the legislative, or the prince, either of them, act contrary to their trust. First, the legislative acts against the trust reposed in them when they endeavour to invade the property of the subject, and to make themselves, or any part of the community, masters, or arbitrary disposers of the lives, liberties, or fortunes of the people.
The reason why men enter into society, is the preservation of their property, and the end why they chuse and authorize a legislative, is that there may be laws made, and rules set, as guards and fences to the properties of all the members of the society, to limit the power, and moderate the dominion of every part and member of the society. Whenever the legislators endeavour to take away and, destroy the property of the people, or to reduce them to slavery under arbitrary power, they put themselves into a state of war with the people,
who, are thereupon absolved from any farther obedience, and are left to the common refuge, which God hath provided for all men against force and
violence.. What is here said concerning the legislative, holds good also concerning the supreme executor, who having a double trust put in him
both to have a part in the legislative, and the supreme execution of the law, acts against both, when he goes about to set up his own arbitrary will, as
the law of the society. He acts, also contrary to his trust, when he either imploys the force, treasure, and offices of the society, to corrupt the representatives, and gain them to his purposes; or preengages the electors, and prescribes to their choice, such whom he has by solicitations, threats, pro-
mises or otherwise won to his designs, and employs them to bring in such who have promised beforehand, what to vote, and what to enact. Thus to regulate candidates and electors, and new model the way of election, what is it but to cut up government by the roots, and poison the very fountain of public security? For the people having reserved to themselves the choice of their
representatives, as a fence of their properties, and could do it for no other end but that they might be always freely chosen, and so chosen, freely act and advise, as the necessity of the commonwealth and the public good should, upon examination, and mature debate be judged to require. This, those, who give their votes before they hear the debate, and have weighed the reasons on all fides, are not capable of doing. To prepare such an assembly as this and endeavor to let up the declared abettors of his own will, for the true representatives of the people, is certainly as great a breach of trust, and as perfect a declaration of a design to subvert the government, as is possibly to be met with. To which, if we should add rewards and punishments, visibly
employed to the same end, and all the acts of perverted law made use of, to take off and destroy all, that stand in the way of such a design, and who will not comply and consent to betray the liberties of their country.

SATURDAY June 16, 1770 
   THIS country seems to be upon the verge of destruction, and it is much to be feared that its ruin will soon be completed principally owing to this absurd maxim; the king can do no wrong. The meaning of these words are perverted to a sense very different from that which was at first intended by them. And I will be bold to say that the ridiculous doctrine of passive obedience and hereditary divine right, has been the cause of more bloodshed and desolation in this kingdom than all the resistance that was ever made to the tyrannical acts of the king's of England. The just and true meaning of the words, the king can do no wrong is only this, that the king's power cannot go so far as to support him in the doing of any injustice or wrong to any, according to that chapter in magna chart a, by which all commissions granted against law, are
declared to be null and void. But there is no necessity to carry this so far, as, that if king's will strain their authority visibly, to do the greatest wrongs possible, they are in no respect, accountable for it.
   Whatever has been done in parliament and has never been condemned by any subsequent one, is a part of the law of England. Since then two of our king's, Edward the second, and Richard the second have been judged in parliament for their mal-administration, and since these judgements have never been vacated by any subsequent parliaments, those proceedings are a part of our law; and as long as they remain upon record, it is plain that this great right of the English nation of preserving itself in cases of extream necessity, against the violent invasions the crown may make upon it, is still entire and in force. It is therefore to be hoped that the people of England, will no longer be guilty of so unreasonable a piece of tenderness, as not to lay the
blame of their misfortunes where they ought to be laid. The king has gone so far in what he has averred lately, that we can no longer believe he has been imposed upon, but that he means not only to treat with contempt, the people of England, but to destroy; in conjunction with an abandoned ministry, whom he is determined not to part with, and the pernicious advice of a still more abandoned w the liberties of this country. It would therefore be more suitable to the dignity, as well as to the wisdom and safety of the English nation, to act frankly and openly with the sovereign. I can conceive no reason why the arbitrary and illegal acts of a prince of the house of Brunswick should be varnished over, or submitted to; our forefathers set us a very different example in the last century, and preserved themselves free; an example that I will
prophecy we must soon follow, or quietly submit to a state of slavery and of the worst kind, that established by the three estates of the kingdom,
king, lords, and commons. Our government is founded upon resistance, and we have an undoubted right to defend any invasion of our liberties or property by force,or with what shadow of truth can it be said, we are free. It was a complaint against James the second, at the time of the last revolution, that he would not call a free parliament, it was the principal cause of that revolution; and justified every proceeding against the infatuated king, and the people of England in calling for the assistance of the Prince of Orange, to redress their grievances and restore the constitution to its ancient freedom and security. It was a complaint, that James had assumed to himself a power of suspending and dispensing with the execution of the laws. It was a complaint that he displaced all honest and conscientious judges, who would not contrary to
their consciences, declare that to be law which was illegal and arbitrary, and branding all men with the name of rebels, that offered to justify the laws, in a legal course against the arbitrary, proceedings of the king, or any of his corrupt ministers. By forbidding the subjects the right of petitioning and construing them libellers, in order to serve his own arbitrary ends and purposes. The complaints of the English nation at this time are nearly similar, the king has been petitioned by a majority of the freeholders of this kingdom to dissolve the present self-elected house of commons, and to send them to the
choice of new representatives uninfluenced and uncorrupted; his majesty has absolutely refused to comply with the request of his people, and treated the petitioners with the greatest contempt; the answer given to the last remonstrance from the city of London, was such as the most despotic tyrant of the East would not have dared to utter, much less a king of England governing a brave and free people. If therefore his present majesty like James the second is determined not to call a free parliament, and redress the grievances of the people, but to set up his own will in opposition to that of his subjects and the laws of the land; they will be justified in seeking redress with their own hands. The King is apprehensive that a free and lawful parliament being once assembled, would bring to a strict and severe account, those wicked and abandoned ministers, who have been desperate enough to destroy the first principles of our most excellent constitution; and in all probability enquire a littler into his conduct, for encouraging and supporting them in these violations. This was what James the second dreaded, and what George the third seems to fear; the former rather than make any concessions to the people, or comply with their repeated importunities, to call a free parliament
and redress the grievances of the nation, chose to desert the kingdom and abdicate three crowns; and the latter, seems very ambitious of treading in his steps, and even more desirous than James was of involving this nation in all the horrors of a civil war; and which from the face of things nothing can prevent, but an immediate and a bold opposition to the present measures of government, I shall speak plain, others may disguise their meaning in what manner they please. I mean the measures of the king and his ministers.
   James assumed a power of suspending and dispensing with the execution of the laws, and our present most gracious has upon many occasions done the same, I need only mention a few instances. First the soldiers in St. George's-Fields being suffered to escape without being once advertised as deserters or murderers. Notwithstanding Mr. Allen the father of the unfortunate young
Allen, who was unhumanely shot by them, petitioned the King, and humbly begged a proclamation might be issued for apprehending the murderers of his son, but no such thing, this is not the reign for justice.
   James displaced all honest judges who had any conscience, because they would not declare that to be law, which was illegal and arbitrary, and branded all men with the name of rebels, who offered to justify the laws against his despotic proceedings, Lord Camden was turned out of his office because, he gave his opinion in parliament, in support of the laws and constitution of his country. James forbid the right of petitioning, and declared those who did so to be libellers. The same sort of game is now playing over again, with many other notorious violations of the rights of the people.
   In the British constitution it is acknowledged that there are three powers that govern the whole; and that either of these predominating over the other two, occasions instant disorder, and if not remedied in time, may totally ruin this excellent fabrick, the work of ages. Will any man then pretend, that we can be good subjects, honest citizens, humane parents, or even rational creatures, if we sit still with folded arms and observe the progress of any one of these powers towards supreme power over the others, much less when we
see two of them closely combined and united in a consolidated system, a regular digested plan to destroy the third? or shall we be deterred from
the brave, the generous purpose, of restoring that equal poise to the three powers which forms and preserves the perfection of our government, because the two prevailing powers join in an outcry against us, and rank us among the sons of riot, tumult, and sedition. No, my countrymen till it can be fairly proved, that in the most important concerns of government since the year 1760, these three powers have been equally poised, and have each of them had their proper influence; do not desert your duty, but as power is, in some shape or other, perpetually endeavouring to usurp, let liberty be perpetually on its guard, prompt upon every occasion to re-assume whatever it has been dispossessed of; and diligent in fortifying wherever an attack is likely to be made.
   As a prevailing power will, at all times, draw many friends, a man must expect to meet with opposition in this laudable undertaking; and should things come to a crisis in the convulsive motions of the disordered constitution, he may possibly sacrifice his family, his fortune, and his life, in the glorious attempt to restore the, true equilibre of the state. But let him remember, that the exalted, the highly finished master piece of human nature, the genuine patriot, lives not for himself, nor for the narrow circle of domestic connections, but for the good of that great society of men who have registered him as a brother volunteer in the service of his country; and therefore expect from him, that no relations, no private friendship, no favour received no benefit arising to himself, no personal danger to be avoided shall induce him to desert the common cause, or to neglect contributing, as much as in him lies, to its success. And when a conspiracy is formed against the constitution, it will be required of him to join a confederacy to defeat it.
   In the present age I believe no man will suspect, except the tools of administration, that there is too great weight in the democratical scale of our
constitution, nor yet in the aristrocratical separately and distinctively considered; but when we view it as coming in aid of the monarchical, and
adding fresh weight to that preponderating scale, we have reason to complain of it. And that the power and influence of the crown, or at least of the ministers of the crown, is become so heavy, that it has overset the balance of the state, and put the constitution out of order, is so evident, that no impartial independant Englishmen will presume to deny it; or that the liberties we still
enjoy, seem to depend more on the wisdom and goodness of his Majesty, in not making an improper use of the power that has been thrown into his hands, that in the weight of the democratical scale, which has been lightened by means of posts, pensions, ecclesiastical, civil and military translations and promotions, and by private applications of the public treasure, all of which now depend upon the arbitrary will and pleasure of the King and his ministers for the time being.
   If ever the crown, or the minsters of the crown, should be able by any of the means just recited, to influence elections of all kinds, and both houses of parliament, so as always to have a majority in each house, under the absolute direction of the prime minister for the time being, it will not be necessary for any minister to desire a farther sacrifice of our constitution; for by both houses
being under such a direction, (and that they are now I believe no one will deny) our constitution would be as effectually destroyed, as if both houses
had joined in an absolute surrender of all the liberties and privileges of the people. The art of government would in this case be reduced to one uniform, narrow, mean system of corruption, under which the antient form might be kept up; but every man must see that the life and spirit of the constitution would be lost, and that the state would from that moment become an absolute monarchy, and that one of the worst kind.
    Under such a government as this it would be impossible for the people, in a legal and regular method, to bring any minister to justice, let him be as rapacious and oppressive, as persidious and revengeful as it is possible to conceive, so long as he continued to be the favourite of the crown. This sort of government the king when rightly informed, can never (I should think) desire to countenance  --  it is inconsistent with his interest, it is personally dangerous to him.  --  For it is the interest of the chief governor in a free state, to have some legal method established and left open; by which the people may testify their discontent; by which they cast call those to account who have given them just cause of offence, and, as by our constitution, the king is not directly responsible: in his own person for any faults of oppressions committed by his servants, even though they have his order in writing: it can never be the interest of the King to draw on himself the popular resentment, which ought to fall upon his ministers, by protecting and screening them behind the throne; nor can it be consistent with his safety. And if he permits them, by dispensing with a lavish hand the favours of the crown, they may secure not
only a ministerial majority in parliament, but a ministerial party in the nation, which may make it dangerous for him to dismiss them from his service; and he will become a royal slave. Therefore, when such an undue influence prevails in this country, that all the laws against bribery and corruption, are rendered ineffectual, and a majority is obtained in both houses, of men who will basely submit to be told in express terms, what way , they are to vote, from the impossibility of bringing ministers to justice, by the ordinary legal method, it will be absolutely necessary to take some extraordinary steps suited to the crisis of affairs to reduce our government as much as we can, to its first principles, by destroying that ministerial power of the crown, which shelters the ministers, and supports their tyranny over the people. This is our only road to salvation, every other method is but nibbling at the bait. If we have a mind to be absolutely safe, we must cut the line, on which are strung the gilded trophies of corruption.
   At the hazard of our lives we must insist on restoring the balance of power, equally lodged in the three estates of the realm; and in order to effect this we must not only petition the King, but insist upon a dissolution of a parliament, consisting chiefly of representatives of the minister instead of representatives of the people.
   And till this is complied with, in such desperate cases as I have described, be it remembered, that the civil compact between the prince and the people is dissolved by the venality of his ministers, and they may lawfully with-hold all taxes, subsidies, and aids, which were granted in virtue of the existence of the constitution, but are forfeited and annulled in the moment that the equipoise is overturned; for then the constitution under which they were granted is dissolved.

SATURDAY June 23, 1770
To William De Gray, Esq; 
His Majesty's Attorney-General
SIR,
AS you and lord Mansfield (the Jefferies of our time ) have been very lately executing a plan of a most diabolical nature, (concerted many months ago) for destroying the liberty of the press, and rendering useless that great privilege
and boast of Englishmen, trial by jury. It will neither be doing you (thou Noy of the age) nor his lordship any injustice to make you appear as __  as you deserve, that you may be held in contempt not only by the present generation, but to the end of time, as enemies to the laws and liberties of England and traitors to your sovereign, whose trust and confidence you have abused, whose easy temper and understanding you have imposed upon, and whose ruin with that of this country you are about to accomplish. You may indulge your rage against me, I will remain the same, whether under prosecution or free from the hands of tyrants and murderers. It is happy for me, I am my own publisher, or you and Mansfield (from the success you have met with in terrifying booksellers) would not now appear in your true and genuine colours, the authors and promoters of tryanny, bloodshed, and desolation.
I am determined to persevere and to expose every measure adopted by you and lord Manssield, pregnant with the ruin of this my native country. I loose all kind of patience when I reflect on the melancholy state of this kingdom, and the villanous principles of those men intrusted by the sovereign with the management of our affairs. I am fired with a just indignation against the
authors of our misfortunes: and if I appear too warm, I hope it will be imputed to my zeal in the public cause, and not to any malice or resentment against individuals, for I here declare to have none; but would willingly sacrifice my
life, could I rescue my country from the hands of paricides and traitors, and from that destruction which now threatens it.
   It is notoriously known, notwithstanding what was asserted from the throne, that we do not now enjoy undiminished one single privilege, purchased by the blood of our ancestors, and confirmed to us by Magna Charta and the Bill of
Rights. Every man then who remains passive at this time, an enemy and a traitor to his country; when he sees one branch of the legislature violating the first principles of the constitution, and the other two confirming those violations, when he sees the chief justice of England supporting the king's attorney-general, in the most arbitrary and unconstitutional prosecutions against printers and publishers, with no other view but totally to destroy the liberty of the press; the great terror of tyrants and oppressors. When he
hears the chief justice, by sophistical arguments, and the chicanery of law, explaining away the right and power of a jury, and telling them that they are not to determine the legality or illegality of a matter before them; (unhappy England! Thy liberties now depend upon the will and pleasure of one man, an arbitrary Scot) I say when he sees these things, what honest man, but would
risque his life to preserve the laws and constitution of his country. But to return, you Sir, in April last, (with your informers) at Hick's-Hall, threatened the Grand Jury, (because some of them were for throwing out the bill of indictment against the author of the Whisperer) and told them if they did not find a true bill, that they should be had up to the bars of the houses of lords
and commons. If you can so easily by menaces lead one jury to find a bill of indictment, and lord Mansfield by his sophistry, another, to find a verdict: the fate of this country is truly deplorable; you are forging chains for us thou prostituted venal wretch, and (the still more prostituted) Mansfield is
rivetting them as fast as possible; I must therefore, warn my countrymen to remember they are descended from freemen, from Britons; and boldly stand
in the gap, to remember, they are jurymen, and that the liberties of their countrymen are in their hands; and to give that verdict they can answer in a place where no party, no statesmen, no judge, no king can opress for a strict adherence to truth and justice.
   The prostituted Noy attorney-general to Charles the first, was the principal cause of that unhappy prince being brought to the block, he not only countenanced, but supported the project of ship-money, which was the ruin of that monarch. James the second for exercising a dispensing power (which he had prevailed upon the judges to declare was a right belonging to the crown) was dethroned. And I hope every prince who attempts to govern this nation in an arbitrary and despotic manner, will be either exiled or brought to the block. That prince who would deprive his subjects of any of their rights or liberties, is
as manifest a traitor to his country, as they are guilty of treason who would usurp the just and legal prerogatives of the crown.
   Happy is the sovereign, who rules over a free people, able and ready (while he does his duty) to support his crown and dignity; endued with wisdom and integrity to discern and detect evil counsellors, and not afraid to demonstrate their loyalty and public spirit in the pursuit of justice, against the authors of their grievances; and to give due praise with tokens of their gratitude and applause, to those, who entrusted with the honour and dignify of the crown, and the liberties and security of the nation, have distinguished their
administration by disinterested and constitutional measures. 
   Englishmen need not spend their time by seeking for examples of these truths in ancient history. Their forefathers have left many precedents of their watchfulness over the measures of those counsellors that environed the throne; of their hanging such as merited a halter for misleading their prince, and attempting to ruin the kingdom; and of their idolizing others, whose
actions were calculated to promote the interest and glory of their king and country.
   How nearly bordering upon self preservation is it to cut off the cause of our danger and misfortunes, domestic errors contribute to national ruin and foreign invasion; therefore as a course of mismanagement, of ambition and avarice, of an evil and corrupt administration, has generally preceded all revolutions; it is highly incumbent on the people of England at this time to have a watchful eye on the constitution, more especially so when the king's attorney-general and the chief justice of England, are by unwarrantable decisions in the courts of justice, attempting to establish an arbitrary system of government.
   Our safety depends upon impartiality, justice, zeal for the public good and a steady adherence to the interests and welfare of our country; where those
are wanting, neither large territories, nor powerful fleets nor armies can prevent our destruction. A luxurious and wicked administration may as easily
sport away a kingdom, as their own private fortunes. Abuse of power makes corruption necessary: corruption produces baseness, luxury, and the
privation of all virtue; and these generate usurpation and tyranny, which we have severely felt for some years, and which we are not likely to be freed from soon, while the sovereign remains deaf to the cries of an injured people, and is
determined to support through perverseness and obstinacy, those wretches who have destroyed the liberties of this country and almost involved us in a civil war, however it is possible his majesty may be reduced to reason, nay it is absolutely, necessary he should before the ruin of England is accomplished, it will then be too late.
   Whoever seeks for power in order to destroy the constitution of a free people; or maintains his standing at the helm of state by tyannical measures, will be remembered with ignomy. His wisdom will be darkened by usurpation: his courage will be lost in cruelty: and his justice will be destroyed by selfish views.
   The actions of a Bute, a Hallifax, a Grafton, and a North, will never be forgotten: it being much the same to advise the king to rule by a corrupt parliament, as to govern without one: to misapply the public money, as to raise it without law; and to put it in the power of a committe of elections to annul the choice of the people, as to deprive the people of their right to
chuse their own representatives.
   Look into the revolutions of all times and nations, and it will be seen that they have been occasioned by the mal-administration of statesmen, and the perverseness or folly of the prince. The iniquity of their actions should therefore remain caution to posterity how they are to be obviated and corrected; and a memorial of the necessity to be ever watchful against their
encroachments. The passiveness of subjects under attempts to enslave them, has always ended with the loss of their liberty. And all measures which are calculated to weaken, impoverish, or divide a nation, ought to be considered amongst the most certain means of its destruction.
   Whenever it has happened that a prince had wisdom and resolution enough to discover, who deserves his confidence, and who do not, and to refuse his ear to every one who is unworthy of it, he has always found a sufficient supply or all he has wanted for the support of his crown and dignity, and for the peace, security, and interest of his subjects; but wherever it has been seen that a prince prefers those who think of nothing but accommodating themselves and their measures to his humour; tho' he may have in himself all the best dispositions for government, he by this one false step annihilates all his good qualities, and blunders on with his bad guides, till he looses the affections of his people and becomes the ridicule of foreign states.
   The greater princes are and the more they have in their power to give ; the more they are exposed to the covetousness and ambition of artful and designing men, and when once they begin to be soothed, they grow reserved and suspicious, of those who retain their integrity and fidelity, and refuse to imitate their adulation. They interpret their uprightness and steady conduct, to be a secret dissatisfaction, a kind of malignity and envy, or a desire to diminish their glory. They speak to them with less affability, and consult
them seldom or not at all.
   Thus his majesty having given himself up to, You, Mansfield, North, Norton, Weymouth, Barrington, and some other sycophants who feed him with the basest flattery and deceitfulness, and driven from him all such, as excell in virtue and are inspired with a noble emulation for the public good; there is no wonder his court should be filled with persons who study nothing but to deceive him; and while he vainly thinks himself beloved and admired by every one, he is surrounded by secret enemies, who have conspired to hide the truth from him, who are busy in preparing poison for his ears and heart, and in gilding it over with an agreeable appearance: and who, under false pretences of the most profound respect to him, and the highest admiration of all he does, secretly make a jest of his folly, and despise him for his credulity. For, as you are base enough to deceive the king by misrepresentations, you are wicked enough to insult him, which you have done by depriving him of the affection of
his subjects. 
   As you have through treachery robbed his majesty and the kingdom, of that wisdom and equity, the discernment between truth and falshood; and of that love for justice and the public good, which are the most essential qualities for promoting his own true happiness, and that of his people, no wonder that he from a disgust at truth proceeds to a hatred thereof. You, have now so effectually secured your prince that none dare come near him but those whose tongues are tipped with deceit; in a word the difficulties and dangers, which you have plunged him into, it is much to be feared will prove fatal to his family and this kingdom.
   Had his majesty examined more deliberately into the characters of his favourite ministers and the sycophants about him, who advised him to break the contract made with his subjects, and to introduce an arbitrary government, it is scarce probable that he would have yielded to such pernicious councils.
   Was not this the cause of all the discontent, and bloodshed which has ever been in this island between the sovereign and his people! of all the
sorrow and distress of the royal family, and the misery to which the nation has been so often reduced by intestine broils and tryannical measures. Had not Charles the first preserved the council of his flattering courtiers, to the plain dealing of his faithful subjects, he might have slept with his fathers in peace. His son James was undone and his family excluded from the throne because he delivered himself up to be guided by men of base and corrupt principles, and was advised by them to disregard the remonstrances of his stedfast friends.


