Joseph Priestley
Letters to Edmund Burke, 1791

The Preface
Of the numerous readers, and answerers, of Mr. Burke's long expected Reflections on the Revolution in France, the attention of the greater part will be chiefly drawn to those passages which more immediately relate to the civil constitution of that kingdom. These I have not neglected. But, when I have more particularly replied to, is what he has advanced on civil establishments of religion, which makes no small figure in his performance, and which appears to be a subject not generally understood.
It is with very sensible regret that I find Mr. Burke and myself on the two opposites sides of an important question, and especially that I must now no longer classed him among the friends of what I deem to be the cause of liberty, civil or religious, after having, in a pleasing occasional intercourse of many years, considered him in this respectable light. In the course of his public life, he has been greatly befriended by the Dissenters, many of whom were enthusiastically attached to him; and we always imagined that he was one on whom we could depend, especially as he spoke in our favor in the business of subscription, and he made a common cause with us in zealously patronizing the liberty of America.
That in a valid friend of the American revolution should be an enemy to that of the French, which arose from the same general principles, and in a great measure sprung from it, is to me unaccountable. Nor is it much less difficult to conceive how any person, who has had America in his eye so long as Mr. Burke must necessarily have contemplated it, could be so impressed, as he appears to be, in favor of ecclesiastical establishments. That country he sees to flourish as much as any other in the annals of history, without any civil establishment of religion at all. There he must see the civil government goes on very well without it. It neither stands in need of religion, or does religion stand in need of it. For America is so far from being the country of atheists and unbelievers, that there is, I doubt not, a stronger general sense of religion there than in any other part of the world.
In America also, and indeed in every other part of the known world, except the southern part of this particular island, Mr. Burke sees all civil offices open to persons of all religious persuasions without distinction, and without any inconvenience having been known to arise from it; and yet here he joins with the bigoted clergy, in rigorously confining them to the members of the established church. But even this is not so extraordinary as his not scrupling to class all the enemies of establishments with cheats and hypocrites, as if our opinions were so palpably absurd, that no honest man could possibly entertain them.
Some are disposed to ascribe this change in Mr. Burke's views and politics, to his resentment of the treatment of the coalition by the Dissenters. And certainly so sudden an union of Mr. Burke and his friends with Lord North, with whom they had been a state of violent opposition during the whole of the American war, did fill the Dissenters, but not the Dissenters only (for the shock affected the greater part of the nation) with horror. In this it is possible they might have judged wrong, listening to no reason against the effects the first unfavorable impression; but they certainly acted from the best principles, and attachment to liberty, virtue, and consistency; and they lamented the fall of Mr. Burke, as that of a friend and a brother.
However, the question before the reader, is not the propriety or impropriety of any particular man's conduct, but the wisdom of great measures of government; as whether it be right, and wise, to connect the business of religion with that of the state, in the manner in which it is done in this country, and whether the French nation is justifiable in their attempts to change their archery form of government for another which they deem to be more favourable to their interests and natural rights.
The question also with respect to them, is not whether they have taken the very best methods possible to gain their end, but whether the thing itself was worth their aiming at, and whether they have been those very great fools that Mr. Burke makes them to be. After all, mankind in general will judge by the event. If they succeed in establishing a free government, they will be applauded for their judgment, as well as for the spirit that they have shewn; and if they fail, they will be condemned for their precipitants he and folly. Thus every successful revolt is termed the revolution, and every and unsuccessful one rebellion.
If the principles that Mr. Burke now advances (though it is by no means with perfect consistency) be admitted, mankind are always to be governed as they have been governed, without any inquiry into the nature, or origin, other governments. The choice of the people is not to be considered, and though their happiness is aukwardly enough made by him the end of government; yet, having no choice, they are not to be judges of what it is for their good. On these principles, the church, or the state, once established, must forever remain the same. This is evidently the real scope of Mr. Burke's pamphlet, the principles of it being, in fact, no other than those of passive obedience and non-resistance, peculiar to the Tories and the friends of arbitrary power, such as were echoed from the pulpits of all the high Church party, In the Reigns of the Stuarts, and of Queen Anne. Let them, however, be produced again, and let us see in what manner they will be treated by the good sense and spirit of Englishmen at the present day.
After the first part of these letters relating more immediately to the French Revolution were printed, I had an opportunity of seeing the memoir of the Memoir of the Comte De Lally Tollendal, of whose account of the transaction of sixth of October, Mr. Burke has availed himself so much, p. 109, etc. calling him "one of the most honest, intelligent, and eloquent members of the National Assembly." I have particularly compared his account of this Assembly, with that of Mr. Burke, p. 24 where he says, "I consider this assembly as nothing else than a voluntary association of men who have availed themselves of circumstances to seize upon the power of the state, and that they have not the sanctioned, and authority, of the character under which they first met."
Mr. Lally Tollendal's ideas were certainly very different from these of Mr. Burke. Four, speaking of his being chosen a member of the Assembly, he says, p. 5, "it was, without doubt, a great occasion, and a great work, to concur in the regeneration of France, in founding liberty there, and in creating laws and manners!" What, then, has the National Assembly done, or attempted to do, more than this, which Mr. Lally Tollendal clearly conceived to have been the design of their meeting? Though he thought proper to leave this Assembly, yet he acknowledges, p. 45, that "the majority of the persons who composed it, had the purest intentions;" and he speaks in the highest terms of approbation concerning the declaration of Rights, which was their first Act.  After making some objections respecting the form, more than the substance, he says, p. 125, "it contains all the great principles which are the guards of societies, which maintain the rights of man, and of his dignity, and which secure his tranquility and happiness." And these are those rights of men which Mr. Burke treats with so much ridicule.
In order to form a judgment whether the National Assembly had actually exceeded their commission, or had undertaken more than was required of them, I also looked into the King of France's circular letter for the convocation of the States of Versailles, dated January 24, 1789, as it is contained in the new Annual Register, four 1789, p.111. According to it, this Assembly was convened "to establish a steady, constant, and invariable order in every part of government, that interested the happiness of the people, and the prosperity of the kingdom; that an effectual remedy might be applied to the disorders of the state, and that abuses of every kind might be reformed and prevented, by good and solid means, proper to ensure a permanency of the public happiness." And lastly, it is said to be "for every thing that might concern the present and future wants of the state.
Again, in the King's letter to the President of the Assembly, dated May 28, 1789, he says, "I cannot say without pain the National Assembly, which I have called together, to be concerned with me in the new regulation of the kingdom, sunk into inaction; which if continued, would cause all the hopes which I have formed for the happiness of my people, and the benefit of the state to prove abortive."
Certainly, therefore, in the opinion of the King, as well as in that of the whole nation, there was a want of total reform in the constitution of the French government, and this reform was expected from the National Assembly. This is the very thing which they are endeavoring to affect, and in which they have made considerable progress. What they have done gives the greatest pleasure to the friends of universal liberty, though unfortunately it gives pain to Mr. Burke, and some others.
LETTER I.
On the general Principles of the French Revolution.
Dear Sir,
I do not wonder that the late revolution in the French government has excited your attention, and that of a great part of the nation. "It is," as you justly say, p.11, "all circumstances taken together, the most astonishing that has hitherto happened in the world." It is, therefore, a most interesting object both to philosophical and practical politicians. It behooves them particularly to consider the principles on which it has been made, that if the conduct of the leaders in the business has been right, and if this scheme promises to be beneficial to the country, it may, as far as their situations are similar, be imitated in other countries; and that, if their conduct has been wrong, and the result of it unpromising, the example may serve to deter others from any attempt of the like kind.
But though there is nothing extraordinary in this revolution having excited so much of your attention, I am surprised that you should be so much alarmed and disturbed at it. You appear to me not to be sufficiently cool to enter into this serious discussion. Your imagination is evidently heated, and your ideas confused. The object before you do not appear in their proper shapes and colours; and, without denying them, you lose sight of the great and leading principles, on which all just governments are founded, principles which I imagined had been long settled, and universally assented to, at least by all who are denominated whigs, the friends of our own revolution, and of that which has lately taken place in America. To this class of politicians, you, Sir, have hitherto professed to belong, and traces of these principles may be perceived in this work of yours.
Notwithstanding "the sacredness," as you call it, p.29, "of and hereditary principle of succession," in our government, you allow of "the power of change in its application in cases of extreme emergency;" adding, however, that "the change should be confined to the peccant part only." Nor do you deny the great and an object of all government, that which makes it preferable to a state of anarchy, is the good of the people. It is better for them, and they are happier in a state of society and government. For the same reason, you must allow that that particular form of government, which is best adapted to promote the happiness of any people, is the best for that people.
If you admit thus much, you must also allow that, since every private person is justified in bettering his condition, and indeed commended for it; a nation is not to be condemned for endeavoring to better theirs. Consequently, if they find their form of government to be a bad one, whether it was so originally, or became so through abuse or accident, they will do very well to change it for a better. A partial change, no doubt, will be preferable to a total one, if a partial change will be sufficient for the purpose. But if it appear that all attempts to mend an old constitution would be in vain, and the people prefer a new one, their neighbours have no more business to find fault with them, then with any individual, who should think it more adviseable to pull down an old any convenient house, and build another from the foundation, rather than layout his money in repairs. Nations, no doubt, as well as individuals, may judge wrong. They may act precipitately, and they may suffer in consequence of it: but this is only a reason for caution, and does not preclude a right of judging and acting for themselves, in the best manner that they can.
"The very idea," you say, p.44, "of the fabrication of a new government is enough to fill us with disgust and horror." It is, no doubt, far from being a thing desirable in itself; but it may nevertheless be necessary; and for all the evils arising from the change, you should blame not the framers of the new government, but the wretched state of the old one, and those who brought it into that state. That's some very material change was wanting in the old government of France, you cannot deny, after allowing, p.195, that "in that country the unlimited power of the sovereign over the purses of his subjects, was inconsistent with law and liberty." On other occasions, I believe you have expressed yourself in a stronger manner than this. If law and liberty were wanting in the old constitution, the peccant part must have been the very foundation of it; so that nothing effectual could have been done short of taking down the whole.
If these in incontrovertible principles and facts be admitted, I can see no reason for your exclaiming so violently as you do against the late revolution in France. Besides, whatever has been done, and in whatever manner it has been done, if the nation itself, whom alone it concerns, do not complain, we have no business to complain for them, any farther than the interest we taken the welfare of others, may lead us to feel for the distresses which we apprehend their folly and precipitancy may bring upon them. I shall, however, briefly consider the principle of your objections to this revolution.
You consider the present National Assembly of France as usurpers, assuming a power that does not belong to them. "I can never," you say, p.242, "consider this assembly as any thing else than a voluntary association of men, who have availed themselves of circumstances to seize upon the power of the state. They have not the sanction and authority of the character under which they first met. They have assumed another, of a very different nature, and have completely altered and inverted all the relations in which they originally stood. They do not hold the authority they exercise under any constitutional law of the state. They have departed from the instructions of the people by whom they were sent, which instructions, as the assembly did not act in virtue of any ancient usage, or settled law, were the sole source of their authority."
Now, Sir, even allowing this to be true; admitting this National Assembly to have had no regular summons to meet, or to do any business at all; supposing them to have been men who rose out of the earth, or who drop down from the clouds, or that no body could tell whence they came, and that, without any authority whatever, they took upon themselves to frame a new constitution of government for the French nation; if the nation really approve of it, acquiesce in it, and actually adopted, it becomes from that time their own act, and the assembly That can only be considered as the proposers and advisors. It is the acquiescence of the people that gives any form of government its proper sanction, and that legalizes it. Changes of government cannot be brought about by established forms and rules, because there is no superior power to prescribe those rules. There are no supreme courts comprehending these great objects. Also, the cases occur so rarely, and they are so unlike to one another, that it would be to no purpose to look for precedents.
Now, that the French Revolution is justifiable on this plain principle is evident from the single circumstance of the National Assembly having continued their settings without molestation, and from there decrees having been actually obeyed, for something more than a year at least. This Assembly does not consist, I believe, of more than about 1000 persons, and at first they had no army at their command; whereas at present the whole force of the state is in their hands. This force could not have been transferred from the King to them, without the consent both of the Army, and of the nation which supports that Army. As the nation does not complain of this transition of power, it is evident that the do not think themselves aggrieved, and that the changes been made with their approbation. Here, then, we see all the marks of a legal government, or a government that is really the choice of the people. I do not say what difficulties may hereafter arrives (which if they do, they will probably be the effect of their former government) to induce them to change their opinion. For neither that nation, nor any other, is omniscient and infallible.
Without examining into the former system of government, or the administration of it, we might take for granted, that it must have become extremely odious to the country in general, from the almost universal, and the very hearty, concurrence with which the revolution was brought about. A whole people is not apt to revolt, till oppression has become extreme, and been long continued, so that they despair of any other remedy than that desperate one. The strength of an established government, especially when it is in few hands, and has a large standing army at its command, is almost infinite; so that many nations quietly suffer every evil, and the country becomes in a manner desolate, without their making any attempt to relieve themselves. This is the case at all the Turkish dominions, and is said to be very nearly so in Spain and other countries. Whenever, therefore, we see a whole nation, or great majority of it, rising as one man against an old government, and overturning it, we may safely conclude that their provocation was great, and there cause good.
An oppressed people do not, however, in general see any thing more than what they immediately feel. All they think of is to shake off the load which they can no longer bear; and having thought of nothing but the particular evil that galled them, they are very apt, in their future settlement, to guard against that only, without attending to the whole of their new situation, and the greater evils that may possibly arise from it. Whether the French have done so or not, time must discover. But if the people in general be well informed, and well disposed, they may make many experiments of new forms of government without much inconvenience; and though beginning with a very imperfect one, they adopt a very good one at the last.
Was it not predicted that the Americans, or they're breaking off from this country, would run into universal confusion, and immediately fall to cutting one another's throats? But though that disruption was a violent one, and was affected by a war which drained all their resources, they never suffered for want of government. When the war was over, they bore very contentedly several imperfect and disjointed forms; and now, having taken much time to deliberate on the subject, they have adopted a more comprehensive one. But of this they only propose to make trial, and if it should not answer, they will, no doubt, endeavour to improve upon it.
Now, why may not this be the case with the French, especially as they have no enemies to contend with, and interrupt their proceedings? I am not able to demonstrate the wisdom of several parts of the frame of government at present adopted by the National Assembly, owing, probably, to my not being master of the whole system; and many of the remarks that you have made upon it, may, for any thing that I know, be very just; but not being a judge of their circumstances, and consequently of all their reasons, I presume that they could not at the time have done better. In future however, whatever it be that is now deficient they be supplied. And considering the apparent strength of the ancient French government, and the great numbers that depend upon it (far more, I should imagine, that upon the court and the ministry in this country) I wonder that the revolution was brought about with so much ease, and so little bloodshed.


LETTER II.
Of some Particulars in the new Constitution of France and some Circumstances attending the Dissolution of the old one.
Dear Sir,
It is very possible that the National Assembly, having entered upon the business of reforming the whole state in an unexpected manner, when little could have been preconcerted, may have acted in judiciously in more respects than one; but allowance should be made for their peculiar circumstances. The opportunity that was given them to act with such as they might in vain have waited for, if they had done nothing till they had been prepared to make the most of it. They did right, therefore, to do the best they could, as the occasion offered.
They might, for example, have divided themselves into two houses, and, as in this country, have given each house a negative in all their transactions, and another to the king. But this might have appeared to hazardous at the time; and indeed it is very probable that, upon that plan, nothing effectual could have been done at all. But they may adopt this method if they should hereafter see reason for it. Power is more easily given then taken away.
That they have nothing in the nature of a Senate, as you complain, p. 287, I do not see; while the still retain a king, and allow him to appoint certain ministers of state.
They may have left too little power in the hands of the crown; but kingly power is a plant which, having once taken root, is very apt to grow to luxuriant; and this, though lopped, may sprout again. As the French kings had gradually acquired, and grossly abused, their power, it is not to be wondered at, if, in the first instance, the Assembly should have reduced it too low.
You particularly complain, p. 296, of the King not having the power of peace and war. But was ever any power more grossly abuse and this has been? Infinite have been the evils brought upon whole countries, by princes having it in their power to involve them in war at their pleasure, from motives of personal resentment ambition, where the mere caprice of those about them; and in France generally that of their mistresses.
"There is no other way," you say, p. 296, "of keeping other potentates from intriguing distinctly and personally with the members of your assembly, from intermeddling in all your concerns, and fomenting in the heart of your country the most pernicious of all factions; factions in the interest, and under the direction, a foreign powers." But even this is nothing, compared with the evils that states have suffered from the power of peace and war being in the hands of the Prince, that is, of his ministers; and cannot foreign powers intrigued with them as well as with the leaders of the popular assembly? Did not the court of France intrigued with the ministry of our Charles II, and is it not always done more or less by all ambassadors and their agents in all foreign courts? But if any people was fairly represented in a National Assembly, so that their real interest should be better consulted, causes of war would seldom occur, and consequently there would be but little temptation to foreigners to enter metal in their concerns. For it has been peace or war that has been the chief subject of the intrigues that you complain of.
The most serious difficulty that appears to me to threaten the French government, arises from their debts, a difficulty brought upon them by their former government, and which, indeed, made it impossible to go on any farther with it. This, therefore, is a difficulty that does not necessarily attend the formation of the new government, but has been occasioned by the unwillingness of the present governors, that those who have had confidence in the state, should suffer from the errors of their predecessors. It is the case of an air, who will put himself to great  inconvenience to pay the debts of a profligate ancestor.
You cavil, among other things, at the low rank of the members of the National Assembly; saying, p. 61, "That the majority are of the inferior, on learned, the Canticle, merely instrumental, members of the pro-session of the law. From the moment," you say, "I read the list, I saw distinctly, and very nearly as it has happened, all that was to follow. It was not to be expected," you say, p. 63, "that they would attend to the stability of property, whole existence had always depended upon whatever rendered property questionable, ambiguous, and obscure."
I shall not: question your gift of prophecy. It may be your peculiar talent to see all events, past, present, and to come, in their most concealed causes; nor shall I question what you assert to be a fact. But of whomsoever the National Assembly of France consists, there cannot well be a doubt of there being a truer representation of the French nation that are House of Commons is of hours; because there cannot well be a worse, being in the opinion of most people, I doubt not, as well as that of Dr. Price, a mere mockery of representation, notwithstanding the influence of those causes which I acknowledged to give it the effect of a much better representation.
It signifies very little out of what class of men the members of the National Assembly were chosen, since they must have been persons in whom their constituents thought they could best confide. But if you're reasoning be good, that lawyers, "who's existence depends upon rendering property questionable, ambiguous, and obscure," will not attend to the stability of property, where is our policy in raising such men to the rank of judges? We do not think our property less safe in their hands, because they have always lived by what has been called the glorious uncertainty of the law. The first American Congress, I very well remember, was said to consist chiefly of lawyers; nor is it to be wondered at that it should be so; lawyers, who have the talent in the habit of speaking in public, being generally conspicuous characters in all places. The study of the law, moreover, leads them to understand the constitution of the country, and there profession gives them a knowledge of mankind, and the habits of business. If the lawyers of France do as well as the lawyers of America, they will soon wipe away the reproach they may now lie under, and become the object of respect, perhaps of dread, to those who had present spies them.
It is amusing to compare the sentiments of different writers on the same subject, and to observe and how different a light the same thing appears to different minds. I cannot give a better illustration of this, them by quoting what Dr. Ramsay, in his History of the American Revolution, says of the first Congress, as a contrast to what you say of the National Assembly of France.
"Of the whole number of deputies which formed the Continental Congress of 1774, one half or lawyers; gentlemen of that profession had acquired the confidence of the inhabitants by their exertions in the common cause. The previous measures in the respective provinces, had been planned and carried into effect more by lawyers than by any other order of men. Professionally taught the rights of the people, they were among the foremost to descry every attack made on their liberties. Braden the habits of public speaking, they made a distinguished figure in the meetings of the people, and were particularly able to explain to them the tendency of the late acts of parliament. Exerting their abilities and influence in the cause of their country, they were rewarded with its confidence." Vol. I. p.134.
The mistakes you have fallen into, with respect to the present government of France, I am informed our gross, and your centers founded on them of course, misplaced. You particularly amuse yourself and your readers with the division of the country, p. 254, into squares, and a sub-division of squares within squares, which has no existence but in your own imagination, the actual divisions of the country, being no more squares that are counties.
Taking it for granted, p. 272, that the present members of the National Assembly are not eligible into the next, you deduce many alarming consequences from such an ill-judged measure. But the measure, I have been informed, is your own, not theirs; the present members being as eligible as any others, and, it is generally supposed, that a great majority of them have given so much satisfaction to their constituents, that they will not fail to be re-elected. As you took so much time in preparing your publications for the press, you would have done well to have employed part of it in procuring better information. However, your mistakes will be the means of are getting more correct accounts of the real state of facts; and if any of your censures on the new constitution of France be just, they may be and useful and seasonable lesson to the great actors in the scene; who, I doubt not, will readily learn what they can, even from an enemy.
You make the most tragical representation of the degraded state of the present king of France, calling it, p. 99, "the most horrid, atrocious, and afflicting spectacle, that perhaps ever was exhibited to the pity and indignation of mankind;" considering him as a person who received his crown, with all its powers, from his ancestors, and who had himself done nothing to deserve the treatment that he met with. Admitting this, if by a succession of incroachments, the power of the crown itself had long been enormous, should that be continued, to the terror in distress of the country, for the sake of the innocent head that happens to wear it. And, after all, what has this king suffered? He is still the first in rank, wealth, and power of any person in France. If you say that this power is only nominal, I answer that the power of the most arbitrary princes is little more. They are, in general, only instruments in the hands of those who are about them. As to doing what a man really wishes to do, the last King of France had very little of it; and in general, the higher any man stands in the order of society, the less power he has of doing what he really likes, and the more of his time he spends in doing what he had rather wish not to do, then ther men.
You make a still more lamentable description of the indignities offered to the queen of France; and on this subject you give the most unbounded scope to your eloquence, as if you were her knight, pledged to defend her honour. Now, such is the natural prepossession of mankind, at least in this part of the world (in which the French nation has generally been considered as foremost) in favor of the female sex, and especially in exalted stations, but I think it will not be easy to account for the full of this queen from the height of popularity, to the abhorrence in contempt into which, you tell us, she is sunk, without supposing something very material to her prejudice, though I do not pretend to say what that is. And if she was that intriguing woman, And that enemy to their liberties, that the French nation and general imagine her to of been, she may think yourself fortunate, in such a revolution, as this has been, to have escaped with life. But, is the liberty and happiness of a whole nation to be sacrificed to female beauty and complaisance?
Objects appear in very different lights to different persons, according to their respective situations, and the opportunities they have of observing them. To you, Sir, seventeen years ago, the queen of France, then the Dauphiness, appeared in all her splendor, like "the morning star," p. 112, decorating the face of heaven. To the French themselves, at that time, she probably appeared in the same light; but in the course of so many years progress, she has appeared to them to be nothing better than a comet, foreboding every disaster, and bringing desolation and ruin on their country. You saw nothing but the fine features, and imagine them to belong to a Venus, a Juno, or a Pallas. The French, it seems, have discovered the snaky hair, and find her to be a mere Medusa; and the "ten thousand swords," that you say were then "ready to leap from their scabbards, to avenge even a look that threatened her with insult," would now be drawn against any who would defend her conduct.
You will probably say that something, at least, should have been proved against the queen of France, as well as against the king. But Where, Sir, was the court of law, or justice, in which such a suit could be instituted? When there are no ordinary means of redressing grievances, the people who feel them, and have no other remedy, will have recourse to extraordinary ones; and if thirty millions find her interesting compatible with that of a few, they, of course, being the judges, will not hesitate to decide for themselves, and carry that decision into execution. In this they will, no doubt, proceed irregularly. But You, Sir, should have been upon the spot, and have told them how to proceed in that grave and decorous manner, in which you now say, p. 23, they ought to have acted on this great occasion; and at the same time have obtained the sexual redress of their grievances. For without this, they would have done worse than nothing.
Kings and ministers of state are alone responsible for all the confusion and bloodshed which attend those revolutions which their abuse of power has rendered necessary. They choak up the ordinary channels of justice, and then complain that it overflows its bounds, and that the country is day loosed by it. They who first raised a storm are answerable for all the devastation that it may make.
You late to the charge of the National Assembly what, it is evident, they never authorized, and what, I doubt not, they condemn and regret, even more then you do. "Their cruelty," you say, p. 58, "has not been even the basic result of fear. It has been the effects of their sense of perfect safety, and authorizing treasons, robberies, rapes, assassinations, slaughters, and burnings, throughout their harassed land. But the cause of all was plain from the beginning. This unforced choice, this fond election, of evil, would appear perfectly unaccountable, if we did not consider the composition of the National Assembly, etc."
This, Sir, besides supposing what all moralists reject as absolutely impossible in nature, viz. that any man chuse evil for its own sake, is charging upon the National Assembly every outrage committed by Frenchman (and more, I believe, that ever were committed by them) which were any way connected with the revolution. But is this equitable? Should any thing be laid to the charge of any men, or any body of men, to which they were no way accessary, by their concurrence at the time, or their approbation afterwards? Was the execution of persons particularly of noxious to the populace, and affected either populace only, to be ascribed to the national assembly? Or were the insults which you have so pathetically described, as offered to your adorable queen of France, done by the orders of that body? You must know that they were as innocent of them as the parliament of Great Britain, or as yourself. When any murder is committed, is the first person that you chuse to lay hold of, a guilty person?
In the same rash and indiscriminate manner you described Dr. Price is exulting in the above-mentioned horrid outrages, which, I daresay, give him much more serious concern then they do you, and for a very obvious reason. He wishes to recommend the revolution, and therefore is sorry for everything that disgraces it; where is you wish to discredit it, and are evidently not displeased with any circumstance that favours your purpose. Dr. Price rejoices in the good, and you most on candidly represent him as rejoicing in the evil that has necessarily accompanied it.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours etc.

LETTER III.
Of the Nature of Government and the Rights of Man and of Kings.
Dear Sir,
Considering how much has been written on the subject of government since the Revolution in this country, an event which more than any thing else contributed to open the eyes of Englishmen, with respect to the true principles of it, it is not a little extraordinary that any man of reading and reflexion, as you are, should depart from them so much as you have done.
To vindicate this Revolution, Lord Somers, Bishop Hoadley, Mr. Locke, and many others, have laid it down as a maxim, that all power in any state is derived from the people, and that the great object of all government, is the public good. As a consequence from these fundamental principles, they maintain that all magistrates, being originally appointed by the people, are answerable to them for their conduct in office, and removeable at their pleasure. The right of resisting an oppressive government, that is, such as the people shall deem to be oppressive, they hold most sacred.
You, sir That, do not directly, and in so many words, deny these great principles of all government, or the general conclusion drawn from them. In fact, you admit them all, when you allow, p. 87, that "civil society is made for the advantage of man." But you advance what is really inconsistent with these leading principles, and you would tie up our hands from making any effectual use of them. You seem to have forgotten what you must have formerly learned; but it is too late for us to go to school again, and re-learn the first elements of political science. What are predecessors took great pains to prove, we now receive as axioms, and without hesitation act upon them.
To make the public good the standard of right or wrong, in whatever relates to society and government, besides being the most natural and rational whole rules, has the farther recommendation of being the easiest of application. Either what God has ordained, or what antiquity authorizes, may be very difficult to ascertain; but what regulation is most conducive to the public good, though not always without its difficulties, yet in general it is much more easy to determine. But suppose a nation should never have had a free government, or could not prove that they ever had one, are they for that reason always to continue slaves? Would it be unlawful, or wrong, in the Turks to do what the French nation has now done?
You treat with ridiculed the idea of the rights of men, and suppose that mankind, when once they have entered into a state of society, necessarily abandon all their proper natural rights, and thenceforth have only such as they derive from society. "as to the share of power," you say, p.87, "authority and direction, which each individual ought to have in the management of the state, that I must denied to be among the direct original rights of man and civil society; for I have in my contemplation the civil, social man, and no other. It is a thing to be settled by convention."
But what does this convention respect, beside the secure enjoyment of such advantages, or rights, as have been usually termed natural, as life, liberty, and property, which men had from nature, without societies are artificial combinations of men? Men cannot, surely, be said to give up their natural rights by entering into a compact for the better securing of them. And if they make a wise compact,
