Introduction to a Plan for Benefiting
the New Zealanders

Britain is said to have produced originally nothing but Sloes. What vast advantages have been communicated to her by the Fruits, Seeds, Roots, Herbage, Animals, and Arts of other Countries! We are by their means become a wealthy and a mighty Nation, abounding in all good Things. Does not some Duty hence arise from us towards other Countries remaining in our former State? 
     Britain is now the first Maritime Power in the World. Her Ships are innumerable, capable by their Form, Size and Strength, of sailing all Seas. Her Seamen are equally bold, skilful, and hardy; dextrous in exploring the remotest regions, and ready to engage in Voyages to unknown Countries, tho attended with the greatest dangers. The Inhabitants of those Countries, our Fellow-Men, have Canoes only; not knowing Iron, they cannot build Ships: They have little Astronomy, and no knowledge of the Compass to guide them; they cannot therefore  come to us, or obtain any of our advantages. From these Circumstances, does not some duty seem to arise from us to them? Does not Providence, by these distinguishing Favours, seem to call on us, to do something ourselves for the common Interests of Humanity? 
     Those who think it their Duty to ask Bread and other Blessings daily from Heaven, should they not think it equally a duty to communicate of those blessings when they have received them; and show their Gratitude to their Great Benefactor, by the only means in their power, promoting the happiness of his other Children?
     Ceres is said to have made a Journey thro' many Countries, to teach the use of Corn, and the art of raising it. For this single benefit, the grateful Nations deified her. How much more may Englishmen deserve such Honour, by communicating the knowledge and use, not of Corn only, but of all the other enjoyments Earth can produce, and which they are now in possession of. Communiter bona profundere) Deum est. 
     Many Voyages have been undertaken with views of profit or of plunder, or to gratify resentment; to procure some advantage to ourselves, or do some mischief to others: but a voyage is now proposed, to visit a distant people on the other side the Globe; not to cheat them, not to rob them, not to seize their lands, or enslave their persons; but merely to do them good, and enable them as far as in our power lies, to live as comfortably as ourselves. 
     It seems a laudable wish, that all the Nations of the Earth were connected by a knowledge of each other, and a mutual exchange of benefits: But a Commercial Nation particularly should wish for a general Civilization of Mankind, since Trade is always carried on to much greater extent with People who have the Arts and Conveniencies of Life, than it can be with naked Savages. We may therefore hope, in this undertaking, to be of some service to our Country, as well as to those poor people who however distant from us, are in truth related to us, and whose Interests do, in some degree, concern everyone who can say, Homo sum &c.

August 29, 1771



On a Proposed Act To Prevent Emigration

To the Printer of the Publick Advertiser

Sir,
     You give us in your Paper of Tuesday, the 16th of November, what is called "the Plan of an Act to be proposed at the next Meeting of Parliament to prevent the Emigration of our People." I know not from what Authority it comes, but as it is very circumstantial, I must suppose some such Plan may be really under Consideration, and that this is thrown out to feel the pulse of the Publick. I shall therefore, with your leave,
Give my Sentiments of it in your Paper.
     During a Century and half that Englishmen have been at Liberty to remove if they pleased to America, we have heard of no Law to restrain that Liberty, and confine them as Prisoners in this Island. Nor do we perceive any ill Effects produced by their Emigration. Our Estates far from diminishing in Value thro' a Want of Tenants, have been in that Period more than doubled; the Lands in general are better cultivated; their increased Produce finds ready Sale at an advanced Price, and the Complaint has for some time been, not that we want Mouths to consume our Meat, but that we want Meat
for our Number of Mouths.
     Why then is such a restraining Law now thought necessary? A Paragraph in the same Paper from the Edinburgh Courant may perhaps throw some Light upon this Question. We are there told "that 1500 People have emigrated to America from the Shire of Sutherland within these two Years, and carried with them Pound7500 Sterling; which exceeds a Years Rent of the whole County; and that the single Consideration of the Misery which most of these People must suffer in America, independent of the Loss of Men and Money to the Mother Country, should engage the Attention not only of the landed Interest, but of Administration."  The humane Writer of this Paragraph, may, I fancy, console himself, with the Reflection, that perhaps the apprehended future Sufferings of those Emigrants
will never exist: for that it was probably the authentic Accounts they had received from Friends already settled there, of the Felicity to be enjoyed in that Country, with a thorough Knowledge of their own Misery at home, which induced their Removal. And, as a Politician, he may be comforted by assuring himself, that if they really meet with greater Misery in America, their future Letters lamenting it, will be more credited than the Edinburgh Courant, and effectually without a Law put a Stop to the Emigration. It seems some of the Scottish Chiefs, who delight no longer to live upon their Estates in the honourable Independence they were born to, among their respecting Tenants, but chuse rather a Life of Luxury, tho' among the Dependants of a Court, have lately raised their Rents most grievously to support the Expence. The Consuming of those Rents in London tho' equally prejudicial to the poor County of Sutherland,  no Edinburgh Newspaper complains of; but now that the oppressed Tenants take Flight and carry with them what might have supported the Landlords London Magnificence, he begins to feel for the
MOTHER-COUNTRY, and its enormous Loss of Pound7500 carried to her Colonies! Administration is called upon to remedy the Evil, by another Abridgement of ENGLISH LIBERTY. And surely Administration should do something for these Gentry, as they do any thing for Administration. 
     But is there not an easier Remedy? Let them return to their Family Seats, live among their People, and instead of fleecing and skinning, patronize and cherish them; promote their Interest, encourage their Industry, and make their Situation comfortable. If the poor folks are happier at home than they can be abroad, they will not lightly be prevailed with to cross the Ocean. But can their Lord blame them for leaving home in search of better Living, when he first sets them the Example? 
     I would consider the proposed Law,
1st. As to the NECESSITY of it.
2dly. The PRACTICABILITY.
3dly, The POLICY, if practicable.
and 4thly. The JUSTICE of it.
Pray spare me room for a few Words on each of these Heads.
1ST. As to the Necessity of it.
     If any Country has more People than can be comfortably subsisted in it, some of those who are incommoded, may be induced to emigrate. As long as the new Situation shall be far preferable to the old, the Emigration may possibly continue. But when many of those who at home interfered with others of the same Rank, (in the Competition for Farms, Shops, Business, Offices, and other Means of Subsistence) are gradually withdrawn, the Inconvenience of that Competition ceases; the Number remaining no longer half starve each other, they find they can now subsist comfortably and tho' perhaps not quite so well as those who have left them, yet the inbred Attachment to a native Country is sufficient to over-balance a moderate Difference, and thus the Emigration ceases naturally. The Waters of the Ocean may move in Currents from one Quarter of the Globe to another, as they happen in some places to be accumulated and in others diminished; but no Law beyond the Law of Gravity, is necessary to prevent their Abandoning any Coast entirely. Thus the different Degrees of Happiness of different Countries and Situations find or rather make their Level by the flowing of People from one to another, and where that Level is once found, the Removals cease. Add to this: that even a real Deficiency of People in any Country occasioned by a wasting War or Pestilence, is speedily supply'd by earlier and of course more prolific Marriages, encouraged by the greater Facility of obtaining the Means of Subsistence. So that a Country half depopulated would soon be repeopled, till the Means of Subsistence were equalled by the Population. All Encrease beyond that Point must perish, or flow off into more favourable Situations.Such Overflowings there have been of Mankind in all Ages, or we should not now have had so many Nations. But to apprehend absolute Depopulation from that Cause, and call for a Law to prevent it, is calling for a Law to stop theThames, lest its Waters, by what leave it daily at Gravesend, should be quite exhausted. Such a Law therefore I do not conceive to be Necessary.

2dly. As to the Practicability.
     When I consider the Attempts of this kind that have been made, first in the time of Archbishop Laud, by Orders of Council, to stop the Puritans who were flying from his Persecutions, into New-England, and next by Louis XIV, to retain in his Kingdom the persecuted Huguenots; and how ineffectual all the Power of our Crown, with which the Archbishop armed himself, and all the more absolute Power of that great French Monarch, were, to obtain the End for which they were exerted. When I consider too, the extent of Coast to be guarded, and the Multitude of Cruizers necessary effectually to make a Prison of the Island for this confinement of free Englishmen, who naturally love Liberty, and would probably by the very Restraint be more stimulated to break thro' it, I cannot but think such a Law IMPRACTICABLE. The Offices would not be applied to for Licences, the Ports not be used for Embarcation. And yet the People disposed to leave us would, as the Puritans did, get away by Shipfuls.

3dly. As to the Policy of the Law.
     Since, as I have shewn, there is no Danger of depopulating Britain, but that the Places of those who depart will soon be filled up equal to the Means of obtaining a Livelihood,  
let us see whether there are not some general Advantages to be expected from the present Emigration. The new Settlers in America, finding plenty of Subsistence, and Land easily
acquired whereon to seat their Children, seldom postpone Marriage thro' fear of Poverty. Their natural Increase is therefore in a proportIon far beyond what it would have been if they had remained here. New Farms are daily every where forming in those immense Forests, new Towns and Villages rising;nhence a growing Demand for our Merchandise, to the greater Employment of our Manufacturers and the enriching of our Merchants. By this natural Increase of People, the Strength of the Empire is increased; Men are multiplied out of whom new Armies may be formed on Occasion, or the old recruited. The long extended Sea Coast too, of that vast Country, the great maritime Commerce of its Parts with each other its many navigable Rivers and Lakes, and its plentiful Fisheries, breed multitudes of Seamen, besides those created and supported by its Voyages to Europe; a thriving Nursery this, for the manning of our Fleets in time of War, and maintaining our Importance among foreign Nations, by that Navy which is also our best Security against invasions from our Enemies. An Extension of Empire by Conquest of inhabited Countries is not so easily obtained, it is not so easily secured, it alarms more the neighbouring States, it is more subject to Revolts, and more apt to occasion new Wars. The Increase of Dominion by Colonies proceeding from yourselves, and by the natural Growth. of your own People, cannot be complained of by your Neighbours as an Injury, none have a right to be offended with it. Your new Possessions are therefore more secure, they are more cheaply gained, they are attached to your Nation by natural Alliance and Affection, and thus they afford an additional Strength more certainly to be depended on any that can be acquired by a Conquering Power, tho' at an immense Expence of Blood and Treasure. These methinks are national Advantages that more than equiponderate with the Inconveniencies suffered by a few Scotch or Irish Landlords, who perhaps may only find it necessary to abate a little of their present Luxury or of those advanced Rents they now so unfeelingly demand. From these ConsideratIons, I think I may conclude that the restrainingL aw proposed, would if practicable be IMPOLITIC.

4thly. As to the Justice of it.
     I apprehend that every Briton who is made unhappy at home, has a Right to remove from any Part of his King's Dominions into those of any other Prince where he can be happier. If this should be denied me, at least it will be allowed that he has a Right to remove into any other Part of the same Dominions. For by this Right so many Scotchmen remove into England, easing their own Country of its supernumeraries and benefitting ours by their Industry. And this is the Case with those who go to America. Will not these Scottish Lairds be satisfied unless a Law passes to pin down all Tenants to the Estate they are born on, (adscriptitii glebae) to be bought and sold with it? God has given to the Beasts of the Forest and to the Birds of the Air a Right when their Subsistence fails in one Country, to migrate into another, where they can get a more comfortable Living; and shall Man be denyed a Privilege enjoyed by Brutes, merely to gratify a few avaricious Landlords? Must Misery be made permanent, andisuffered by many for the Emolument of One? While the Increase of Human Beings is prevented, and thousands of their Offspring stifled as it were in the Birth, that this petty Pharaoh may enjoy an Excess of Opulence? God commands to increase and replenish the Earth: The proposed Law would
forbid increasing and confine Britons to their present Number, keeping half that Number too, in wretchedness. The Common People of Britain and of Ireland, contributed by the Taxes they paid, and by the Blood they lost, to the Success of that War, which brought into our Hands the vast unpeopled Territories of North America; a Country favoured by Heaven with all the Advantages of Soil and Climate; Germans are now pouring into it, to take Possession of it and fill it with their Posterity; and shall Britons and Irelanders, who have. a much better Right to it, be forbidden a Share of it, and instead of enjoying there the Plenty and Happiness that might reward their Industry, be compelled to remain here in Poverty and Misery? Considerations such as these persuade me, that the proposed Law would be both UNJUST and INHUMAN. 
     If then it is unnecessary,. impracticable, impolitic, and unjust, I hope our Parliament will never receive the Bill, but leave Landlords to their own Remedy, an Abatement of Rents and Frugality of Living; and leave the Liberties of Britons and Irishmen at least as extensive as it found them. I am,
Sir, Yours &c. 
A Friend to the Poor.
December? 1773


                                 On Civil War 
                                       
To the Printer of the Public Advertiser.
                                       
SIR,
	Threescore Years did the oppressed United Provinces maintain a War in Defence of their Liberties against the then powerful Kingdom of Spain, with all the Wealth of the Indies at it's Command; and finally obliged it to acknowledge their Independency in a formal Treaty, sitting down with the Loss of Territory, Treasure, and Reputation, and with a broken Strength that has never since been recovered. 
	Contractors, jobbing mercantile Members of Parliament, Officers starving on Half Pay, and Gunsmiths who toast, as the Papers tell us, a speedy and a perpetual War, may wish, rather than no War at all, for a Civil one in America. These in all Conversations, to encourage us in undertaking it, slight the Strength of those distant People, think nothing of that Enthusiasm for Liberty, which in other Countries and Ages has supplied all Deficiencies, and enabled a weal People to battle the Efforts of a stronger; but tell us that half a dozen Regiments are sufficient to reduce in less than a Year every Province on the Continent. Half a dozen being once engaged in this blessed Service, it is easy to write and shew the Necessity for more: The more there are, the greater the Profits to those Gentry. And whatever becomes of us poor Devils that live by Manufactures or by Trade, that are to pay Taxes, or that have Money in the Funds, they will amass Fortunes, buy our Estates, bribe our Boroughs, and vote in Parliament the Rectitude of the Measure.
	I believe our Officers and Soldiers as brave as any in the World; and from that very Opinion of their Bravery I conjecture they would not generally relish the being ordered on this murdering Service against their Countrymen; to shed English Blood, to stifle the British Spirit of Liberty now rising in the Colonies; that LIBERTY which we should rather wish to see nourished and preserved there, as on a loss of it here (which
from our vices is perhaps not far distant) we or our Posterity may have Occasion to resort to and participate of; and possibly some of the ablest Officers may chuse, with Sir Jeffery
Amherst, rather to resign their Commissions. But whatever may be the Bravery- and military Prowess of our Troops, and whatever the Zeal with which they would proceed in such a War, there are Reasons that make me suspect it will not be so Soon terminated as some Folks would have us believe. My reasons are drawn chiefly from a Computation founded on Facts. It is well known that America is a Country full of Forests, Mountains, &c. That in such a Country a small irregular Force can give Abundance of Trouble to a regular one that is much greater: And that, in the last War, one of the fifteen Colonies we now have there (and one far short of being the strongest) held out five Years against twenty-jive thousand British regular Troops, joined by twenty-jive thousand Colonists on their own Pay, and aided by a strong Fleet of Men of War. What the Expence was to this Nation, our Treasury Books and augmented Debt may shew. The Expence to America, as their Pay was higher, could not be much less. The Colony we made War upon was indeed aided by France, but during the whole Contest not with more than five thousand Men. Now supposing that the twenty-five thousand Colonists that then joined us should hereafter be against us, and that this makes no Difference, and considering that instead of one Colony to conquer, we are to have fifteen, and that possibly some of our good Neighbours may think of making a Diversion in their Favour, I apprehend it not out of the Way to allow five Years still to a Colony; and this, by my Computation, Will amount to just seventy-five Years. I hope Messieurs the Company of Gunsmiths will for the present be so good as to be content with a Civil War of seventy-five Years, as perhaps we may scarce be able to afford them a perpetual one. 
      And what are we to gain by this War, by which our Trade and Manufactures are to be ruined, our Strength divided and diminished, our Debt increased, and our Reputation, as a generous Nation, and Lovers of Liberty, given up and lost? Why, we are to convert Millions of the King's loyal Subjects into Rebels, for the sake of establishing a newly-claimed power In P to tax a distant People, whose Abilities and Circumstances they cannot be acquainted with, who have a constitutional Power of taxing themselves; who have never refused to give us voluntarily more than we can ever expect to wrest from them by Force; and by our Trade with whom we gain Millions a Year! 
And is there not one wise and good Man to be found in Britain, who can propose some conciliating Measure that may prevent this terrible Mischief?I fear not one. For 
            Quos Deus vult perdere, dementat prius!
N.N.

The Public Advertiser, August 25, 1768


