A Proposed Memorial to Lord Dartmouth

No 23

To the Right honourable the Earl of Dartmouth One of his
Majesty's principal Secretaries of State
A Memorial from Benjamin Franklin Agent of the Province
of Massachusetts Bay.
Given in London, this 16th Day of March, 1775.

Whereas an Injury done, can only give the Party injured a Right to full Reparation; or, in case that be refused, a Right to return an equal injury. And whereas the Blockade of Boston, now continued nine Months, hath every Week of its Continuance done Damage to that Town equal to what was suffered there by the India Company; it follows that such exceeding Damage is an Injury done by this Government, for which Reparation ought to be made. And whereas Reparation of Injuries ought always (agreable to the Custom of all Nations, savage as well as civilized) to be first required, before Satisfaction is taken by a Return of Damage to the Aggressors; which was not done by Great Britain in the Instanceabove mentioned. I the underwritten, do therefore, as their Agent, in the Behalf of my Country and the said town of Boston, protest against the Continuance of the said Blockade:And I do hereby solemnly demand Satisfaction for the accumulated Injury done them beyond the Value of the India Company's Tea destroyed.
     And whereas the Conquest of the Gulph of St. Lawrence, the Coasts of Labrador and Nova Scotia, and the Fisheries possess'd by the French there and on the Banks of Newfoundland, so far as they were more extended than at present, was made by the joint Forces of Britain and the Colonies, the latter having nearly an equal Number of Men in that Service with the former: it follows that the Colomes have an equitable and just Right to participate in the Advantage of those Fisheries. I do therefore in the Behalf of the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay, protest against the Act now under Consideration in Parliament, for depriving that Province, with others, of that Fishery (on pretence of their refusing to purchase British Commodities) as an Act highly unjust and injurious: And I give Notice, that Satisfaction will probably one day be demanded for all the Injury that may be done and suffered in the Execution of such Act: And that the Injustice of the Proceeding is likely to give such Umbrage to all the Colonies, that in no future War, wherein other Conquests may be meditated, either a Man or a Shilling will be obtained from any of them to aid such Conquests, till full Satisfaction be made as aforesaid.
March16, 1775


A War It Will Be

To the Printer of the Publick Ledger

Sir,
     Nothing can equal the present Rage of our Ministerial Writers against our Brethren in America, who have the Misfortune to be Whigs in a Reign when Whiggism is out of
Fashion, who are besides Protestant Dissenters and Lovers of Liberty. One may easily see from what Quarter comes the Abuse of those People in the Papers; their Struggle for their
Rights is called REBELLION, and the People REBELS; while those who really rebell'd in Scotland (1745) for the Expulsion of the present reigning Family, and the Establishment of Popery and arbitrary Power on the Ruins of Liberty and Protestantism;
who enter'd England, and trampled on its Belly as far as Derby, to the Astonishment of this great City and shaking the publick Credit of the Nation; have now all their Sins
forgiven on Account of their modish Principles, and are called not Rebels, but by the softer Appellation of Insurgents!
     These angry Writers use their utmost Efforts to persuade us that this War with the Colonies (for a War it will be) is a national Cause when in fact it is merely a ministerial one. Administration wants an American Revenue to dissipate in Corruption. The Quarrel is about a paltry threepenny Duty on Tea. There is no real Clashing of Interests between Britain and America. Their Commerce is to their mutual Advantage, or rather most to the Advantage of Britain, which finds a vast Market in America for its Manufactures; and as good Pay, I speak from Knowledge, as in any Country she trades to upon the Face of the Globe. But the Fact needs not Testimony, it speaks for itself; for if we could elsewhere get better Pay and better Prices, we should not send our Goods to America. The gross Calumniators of that People, who want us to imbrue our Hands in Brother's Blood, have the Effrontery to tell the World that the Americans associated in Resolutions not to pay us what they ow'd us unless We repeal'd the Stamp Act. This is an INFAMOUS FALSHOOD; they know it to be such. I call upon the Incendiaries who have advanc'd it, to produce their Proofs. Let them name any two that enter'd into such an Association, or anyone that made such a Declaration. Absurdity marks the very Face of this Lie. Every one acquainted with Trade knows, that a credited Merchant daring to be concern'd in such an Association could never expect to be trusted again. His Character on the Exchange of London would be ruined forever. The great Credit given them since that time, nay the present Debt due from them, is itself a Proof of the Confidence we have in their Probity.
     Another villainous Falshood advanc'd against the Americans is, that tho' we have been at such Expence in protecting them, they refuse to contribute their Part to the publick general Expence of the Empire. The Fact is, that they never did refuse a Requisition of that kind. A Writer who calls himself Sagittarius (I suppose from his flinging about, like Solomon's Fool, Firebrands, Arrows and Death) in the Ledger of March 9. asserts that the "Experiment has been tried and that they did not think it expedient to return even an Answer." How does he prove this? Why, "the Colony Agents were told by Mr. Grenville, that a Revenue would be required from them to defray the Expences of their Protection." But was the Requisition ever made? Were circular Letters ever sent by his Majesty's Command from the Secretary of State to the several Colony Governments, according to the establish'd Custom, stating the Occasion, and requiring such Supplies as were
suitable to their Abilities and Loyalty? And did they then refuse not only Compliance but an Answer? No such Matter. Agents are not the Channel thro' which Requisitions are made. If they were told by Mr. Grenville that a "Revenue would be required, and yet the Colonies made no Offer, no Grant laid any Tax," Does it follow they would not have done it if they had been required? Probably they thought it time enough when the Requisition should come, and in fact it never appeared there to this day. In the last War they all gave so liberally, that we thought ourselves bound in honour to return them a Million. But We are disgusted with their Free Gifts; we want to have something that is obtain'd by Force;like a mad Landlord who should refuse the willing Payment of his full Rents, and chuse to take less by way of Robbery. 
     This shameless Writer, would cajole the People of England, with the Fancy of their being Kings of America, and that their Honour is at Stake by the Americans disputing their Government. He thrusts us into the Throne cheek-by-Jole with Majesty, and would have us talk as he writes, of our Subjects in America, and our Sovereignty over America. Forgetting that the Americans are Subjects of the King, not our Subjects,but our Fellow-Subjects; and that they have Parliaments of their own, with the Right of granting their own Money by their own Representatives, which we cannot deprive them of but by Violence and Injustice.
     Having by a Series of iniquitous and irritating Measures provoked a loyal People almost to Desperation, we now magnify every Act of an American Mob, into REBELLION, tho' the Government there disapprove it and order Prosecution, as is now the Case with regard to the Tea destroyed: And we talk of nothing but Troops and Fleets, and Force, of blocking up Ports, destroying Fisheries, abolishing Charters, &c. &c. Here Mobs of English Sawyers can burn Sawmills; Mobs of English Labourers destroy or plunder Magazines of Corn; Mobs of English Coalheavers attack Houses with Fire Arms; English Smuglers can fight regularly the King's Cruizing Vessels, drive them ashore and burn them, as lately on the Coast of Wales,and on the Coast of Cornwall; but upon these Accounts we hear no Talk of England's being in Rebellion; no threats of taking away its Magna Charta, or repealing its Bill of Rights; For we well know that the Operations of a Mob are often unexpected, sudden, and soon over, so that the Civil Power can seldom prevent or suppress them, not being able to come in before they have dispers'd themselves:  and therefore it is not always accountable for their Mischiefs.
     Surely the great Commerce of this Nation with the Americans is of too much Importance to be risk'd  in a Quarrel which has no Foundation but ministerial Pique and Obstinacy! To us, in the Way of Trade, comes now, and has long come, all the superlucration arising from their Labour. But will our reviling them as Cheats, Hypocrites, Scoundrels, Traitors, Cowards, Tyrants &c. according to the present Court Mode in all our Papers, make them more our Friends, more fond of our Merchandize? Did ever any Tradesman succeed who attempted to drub Customers into his Shop? And will honest JOHN BULL the Farmer be long satisfied with Servants that before his Face attempt to kill his Plow-Horses?

A LONDONER.
after March 9, 1774

                            Account of an Audience
                               with Hillsborough
                                                Wednesday, Jan. 16. 1771

I went this Morning to wait on Lord Hillsborough. The Norter at first deny'd his Lordship, on which I left my ame, and drove off. But before the Coach got out of the shall take no Notice of any Agents but such as are appointed by Acts of Assembly to which the Governor gives his Assent. We have had Confusion enough already. Here is one Agent appointed by the Council, another by the House of Representatives; Which of these is Agent for the Province? Who are we to hear on Provincial Affairs? An Agent appointed by Act of Assembly we can understand. No other will be attended to for the future, I can assure you. 

B.F. 	I cannot conceive, my Lord, why the Consent of the Governor should be thought necessary to the Apointmenr of an Agent for the People. It seems to me, that 
L H. 	(With a mix'd Look of Anger and Contempt) I shall not enter into a dispute with YOU, Sir upon this Subject. 
B.F. 	I beg your Lordship's Pardon. I do not presume to dispute with your Lordship: I would only say, that it seems to me, that every Body of Men, who cannot appear in Person where Business relating to them may be transacted, should have a Right to appear by an Agent; The Concurrence of the Governor does not seem to me necessary. It is the Business of the People that is to be done, he is not one of them, he IS himself an Agent. 
L H.	Whose Agent is he? (Hastily). 
B.F. 	The King's, my Lord. 
L H. 	No such Matter. He is one of the Corporation, by the Province Charter. No Agent can be appointed but bv an Act, nor any Act pass without his Assent. Besides, This Proceeding is directly contrary to express Instructions. 
B.F. 	I did not know there had been such Instructions, I am not concern'd in any Offence against them, and 
L H.	Yes, your Offering such a Paper to be entred is an Offence against them. (Folding it up again, without having read a Word of it.) No such Appointment shall be entred. When I came into the Administration of American Affairs, I found them in great Disorder; By my Firmness they are now something mended; and while I have the Honour to hold the Seals, I shall continue the same Conduct, the same Firmness. I think My Duty to the Master I serve and to the Government of this Nation require it of me. If that Conduct is not approved, They may take my Office from me when they please. I shall make 'em a Bow, and thank 'em. I shall resign with Pleasure. That Gentleman knows it. (Pointing to Mr. Pownall.) But while I continue in it, I shall resolutely persevere in the same FIRMNESS. (Spoken with great Warmth, and turning pale in his Discourse, as if he was angry at something or somebody besides the Agent; and of more Consequence to himself.)
B.F. 	(Reaching out his Hand for the Paper, which his Lordship returned to him) I beg your Lordship's Pardon for taking up so much of your time. It is I believe of no great Importance whether the Appointment is acknowledged or not, for I have not the least Conception that an Agent can at present be of any Use, to any of the Colonies. I shall therefore give your Lordship no farther Trouble. Withdrew.


