On Franklin's Ingratitude

To the Printer of the Public Advertiser

Sir
     Your Correspondent Brittanicus inveighs violently against Dr. Franklin for his Ingratitude to the Ministry of this Nation, who have conferred upon him so many Favours. They gave him the Post Office of America; they made his Son a Governor; and they offer'd him a Post of five hundred a Year in the Salt Office, if he would relinquish the Interests of his Country; but he has had the Wickedness to continue true to it, and is as much an American as ever. As it is a settled Point in Government here, that every Man has his Price, 'tis plain they are Bunglers in their Business, and have not given him enough. Their Master has as much reason to be angry with them as Rodrigue in the Play, with his Apothecary for not effectually poisoning Pandolpho, and they must probably
make use of the Apothecary's Justification; Viz.
Scene 4th
Rodrigue and Fell the Apothecary.
Rodrigue. You promised to have this Pandolpho upon his Bier in less than a Week; 'Tis more than a Month since, and he still walks and stares me in the Face. 
Fell  True: and yet I have done my best Endeavours. In various Ways I have given the Miscreant as much Poison as would have kill'd an Elephant. He has swallow'd Dose after
Dose, far from hurting him, he seems the better for it. He has a wonderfully strong Constitution. I find I cannot kill him but by cutting his Throat, and that, as I take it, is not
my Business.
Rodrigue. Then it must be mine.

beforeJanuary 31, 1774


                                 On Sinecures
                                       
To the PRINTER of the GAZETTEER
AND NEW DAILY ADVERTISER.

Great complaints are every day made, that notwithstanding Great Britain has involved herself in a very heavy debt, for the defence of the American colonies in the late war, that now they refuse to pay any part of this debt. On this subject there has been a very smart paper war for some years, which controversy it seems is like to be decided by the all powerful argument of fire and sword. 
      This argument, on the side of Great Britain, has much alarmed me having myself a very considerable interest depending, as well as several near relations on that side the water. 
      From the epithets of unjust, ungenerous rogues, rebels, &c. which are so lavishly bestowed on the Americans, I have been induced to look into those late acts of parliament, which the colonies refuse to comply with, and to my very great surpnze find there is not one single word in those acts for the purpose of raising money to help poor Old England, from which I begin to suspect we are all on a wrong scent. How can we justly accuse them of refusing to assist poor Old England in her distresses, when we neither ask or require it of them? 
      By those acts the money to be raised is for their own use, not ours. But why in the name of wonder was such an act made? The money to be raised, I find, is for their defence and the support of civil government among themselves. When have they suffered by neglecting to raise money for their own defence? So far were they from neglectIng to raise a sufficiency for that purpose during the late war, that I am told the parliament gave them 4 or 500,0001. to reimburse their extra expences. Why then are we to fear, that in a time of profound peace, and when every enemy is driven out of the country, that now they wo'nt raise money for their own defence? This to me is unaccountable; but to send an army to force it for fear it should not be done, is still more unaccountable. 
      As to their civil government, I have ever understood it is more effectually supported there than in any other part of his Majesty's dominions. My countrymen, we are all by the nose: there is a snake in the grass: give yourselves but the trouble to look at those acts, and reflect one moment as I have done, and you will at once see that we are all set by the ears for we know not what. But by your leave I will venture to hint, for your consideration, a very common custom among pick- pockets, i. e. A thief cries catch thief. My reason for this surmise is, from what I have hinted, you at once see we are to have none of this money to ease our taxes: it will be of no use to the Americans, otherwise they would consent to it. Who then is to have the prize we are fighting for? To which I will venture to make answer, Friends and Favourites; for by those acts you will find, that the money raised is put under the direction of the Crown, to pay (or give) to as many or what officers it pleases to appoint in America; all which appointments and salaries, it is well known, are made and concluded upon by the Kg's Ministers. 
      Whoever therefore will give themselves the trouble to look at these acts, which the Americans refuse to comply with, will at once see the whole is a piece of ministerial policy, designed not for the good of Great Britain or her colonies, but for an American establishment, whereby they may be able to provide for friends and favourites. 
      The Irish establishment has been much talked of as a sinecure for friends and favourites, and cast-off mistresses; but this American establishment promises a more ample provision for such-like purposes. That this is the truth of the case, every one that will give himself the trouble must see, unless troubled with the present very polite disorder of being shortsighted.

                                                EXPOSITOR.
The Gazetteer and New Daily Advertiser, September 28, 1768


On the Hutchinson Letters

A Correspondent observes, that the Discovery of Governor Hutchinson's and Oliver's Letters points out an easy Way of re-establishing Peace and Harmony between Great Britain and her Colonies, and consolating the Confidence of the latter, by producing all the confidential Letters received from America in public Affairs, and from public Men. It is in vain to say, this would be betraying private Correspondence, since if the Truth only was written, no Man need be ashamed or afraid of its being known; and if Falshoods have been maliciously covered under the Cloak of Confidence, 'tis perfectly just the incendiary Writers should be exposed and punished. What a weak, what a wicked Plan of Government is that, which, under the Seal of Secrecy, gives Encouragement to every Species of Malice and Misrepresentation. That Government have been deceived almost to the fatal Issue of declaring War against our Colonies is certain; and it is equally certain, that it is in their Power to make an honourable Sacrifice of the wicked Authors of this dangerous Deception.

ThePublic Advertiser, August 31, 1773


                            On the Labouring Poor 
SIR,
	I have met with much invective in the papers for these two years past, against the hard-heartedness of the rich, and much complaint of the great oppressions suffered in this country by the labouring poor. Will you admit a word or two on the other side of the question? I do not propose to be an advocate for oppression, or oppressors. But when I see that the poor are by such writings exasperated against the rich, and excited to insurrections, by which much mischief is done, and some forfeit their lives, I could wish the true state of things were better understood, the poor not made by these busy writers more uneasy and unhappy than their situation subjects them to be, and the nation not brought into disrepute among foreigners by public groundless accusations of ourselves, as if the rich in England had no compassion for the poor, and Englishmen wanted common humanity. 
	In justice then to this country, give me leave to remark, that the condition of the poor here is by far the best in Europe, for that, except in England and her American colonies, there is not in any country of the known world, not even in Scotland or Ireland, a provision by law to enforce a support of the poor. Every where else necessity reduces to beggary. This law was not made by the poor. The legislators were men of fortune. By that act they voluntarily subjected their own estates, and the estates of all others, to the payment of a tax for the maintenance of the poor, incumbering those estates with a kind of rent charge for that purpose, whereby the poor are vested with an inheritance, as it were, in all the estates of the rich. I wish they were benefited by this generous provision in any degree equal to the good intention with which it was made, and is continued: But I fear the giving mankind a dependance on any thing for support in age or sickness, besides industry and frugality during youth and health, tends to flatter our natural indolence, to encourage idleness and prodigality, and thereby to promote and increase poverty, the very evil it was intended to cure; thus multiplying beggars, instead of diminishing them. 
	Besides this tax, which the rich in England have subjected themselves to in behalf of the poor, amounting in some places to five or six shillings in the pound of the annual income, they have, by donations and subscriptions, erected numerous schools in various parts of the kingdom, for educating gratis the children of the poor in reading and writing, and in many of those schools the children are also fed and cloathed. They have erected hospitals, at an immense expence, for the reception and cure of the sick, the lame, the wounded, and the insane poor, for lying-in women, and deserted children. They are also continually contributing towards making up losses occasioned by fire, by storms, or by floods, and to relieve the poor in severe seasons of frost, in times of scarcity, &c. in which benevolent and charitable contributions no nation exceeds us.  Surely there is some gratitude due for so many instances of goodness!	
	Add to this, all the laws made to discourage foreign manufactures, by laying heavy duties on them, or totally prohibiting them, whereby the rich are obliged to pay much higher prices for what they wear and consume, than If the trade was open: These are so many laws for the support of our labouring poor, made by the rich, and continued at their expence; all the difference of price between our own and foreign commodities, being so much given by our rich to our poor; who would indeed be enabled by it to get by degrees above poverty, if they did not, as too generally they do, consider every increase of wages only as something that enables them to drink more and work less; so that their distress in sickness, age, or times of scarcity, continues to be the same as if such laws had never been made in their favour.
	Much malignant censure have some writers bestowed upon the rich for their luxury and expensive living, while the poor are starving, &c. not considering that what the rich expend, the labouring poor receive in payment for their labour. It may seem a paradox if I should assert, that our labouring poor doing every year receive the whole revenue of the nation; I mean not only the public revenue, but also the revenue, or the clear income, of all private estates, or a sum equivalent to the whole. In support of this position I reason thus. The rich do not work for one another. Their habitations, furniture, cloathing, carriages, food, ornaments, and every thing in short that they, or their families use and consume, is the work or produce of the labouring poor, who are, and must be, continually paid for their labour in producing the same. In these payments the revenues of private estates are expended, for most people live up to their incomes. In cloathing and provision for troops, in arms, ammunition, ships, tents, carriages, &c. &c. (every particular the produce of labour) much of the publick revenue is expended. The pay of officers civil and military, and of the private soldiers and sailors, requires the rest; and they spend that also in paying for what is produced by the labouring poor. I allow that some estates may increase by the owners spending less than their income; but then I conceive that other estates do at the same time diminish, by the owner's spending more than their income, so that when the enriched want to buy more land, they easily find lands in the hands of the impoverished, whose necessities oblige them to sell; and thus the difference is equaled. I allow also, that part of the expence of the rich is in foreign produce or manufactures, for producing which the labouring poor of other nations must be paid; but then I say, that we must first pay our own labouring poor for an equal quantity of our manufactures or produce, to exchange for those foreign productions, or we must pay for them in money, which money, not being the natural produce of our country, must first be purchased abroad, by sending out its value in the produce or manufactures of this country, for which manufactures our labouring poor are to be paid. And indeed if we did not export more than we import, we could have no money at all. I allow farther, that there are middle men, who make a profit, and even gets estates, by purchasing the labour of the poor and selling it at advanced prices to the rich; but then they cannot enjoy that profit or the incomes of estates, but by sending them in employing and paying our labouring poor, in some shape or other, for the products of industry Even beggars, pensioners, hospitals, and all that are supported by charity, spend their incomes in the same manner. So that finally, as I said at first, our labouring poor receive annually the whole of the clear revenues of the nation, and from us they can have no more. 
	If it be said that their wages are too low, and that they ought to be better paid for their labour, I heartily wish any means could be fallen upon to do it, consistent with their interest and happiness; but as the cheapness of other things is owing to the plenty of those things, so the cheapness of labour is, in most cases, owing to the multitude of labourers, and to their underworking one another in order to obtain employment. How is this to be remedied? A law might be made to raise their wages; but if our manufactures are too dear, they will not vend abroad, and all that part of employment will fail, unless by fighting and conquering we compel other nations to buy our goods, whether they will or no, which some have been mad enough at times to propose. Among ourselves, unless we give our working people less employment, how can we, for what they do, pay them higher than we do? Out of what fund is the additional price of labour to be paid, when all our present incomes are, as it were, mortgaged to them? Should they get higher wages, would that make them less poor, if in consequence they worked fewer days of the week proportionably? I have said a law might be made to raise their wages; but I doubt much whether it could be executed to any purpose, unless another law, now indeed almost obsolete, could at the same time be revived and enforced; a law, I mean, that many have often heard and repeated, but few have ever duly considered. SIX days shalt thou labour. This is as a positive a part of the commandment as that which says, the SEVENTH day thou shalt rest; but we remember well to observe the indulgent part, and never think of the other. St Monday is generally as duly kept by our working people as Sunday; the only difference is, that, instead of employing their time, cheaply, at church, they are wasting it expensively at the alehouse. 

I am, Sir, &c. 
MEDIUS.

Gentleman's Magazine, April, 1768


