  CONNEXION OF GREAT BRITAIN WITH INDIA
  IN order to open more fully the tendency of the policy, which has hitherto prevailed, and that the House may be enabled, in any regulations, which may be made, to follow the tracks of the abuse, and to apply an appropriated remedy to a particular distemper; Your Committee think it expedient to consider, in some detail, the manner, in which India is connected with this kingdom; which is the second head of their plan.
The two great links, by which this connexion is maintained, are, first, the East India Company's commerce; and next, the Government set over the natives by that Company, and by the Crown. The first of these principles of connexion, namely, the East India Company's trade, is to be first considered, not only as it operates by itself, but as having a powerful influence over the general policy and the particular measures of the Company's Government. Your Committee apprehend that the present state, nature, and tendency of this trade, are not generally understood.
Until the acquisition of great territorial revenues by the East India Company, the trade with India was carried on upon the common principles of commerce, namely, by sending out such commodities as found a demand in the India market; and where that demand was not adequate to the reciprocal call of the European market for Indian goods, by a large annual exportation of treasure, chiefly in silver. In some years that export has been as high as fix hundred and eighty thousand pounds sterling. The other European Companies, trading to India, traded thither on the same footing. Their export of bullion was probably larger in proportion to the total of their commerce; as their commerce itself bore a much larger proportion to the British, than it does at this time, or has done for many years past. But stating it to be equal to the British, the whole of the silver sent annually from Europe into Hindostan could not fall very short of twelve or thirteen hundred thousand pounds a year. This influx of money, poured into India by an emulation of all the commercial nations of Europe, encouraged industry, and promoted cultivation in a high degree; notwithstanding the frequent wars, with which that country was harrassed, and the vices, which existed in its internal Government. On the other hand, the export of so much silver was sometimes a subject of grudging and uneasiness in Europe; and a commerce, carried on through such a medium, to many appeared in speculation of doubtful advantage. But the practical demands of commerce bore down those speculative objections. The East India commodities were so essential for animating all other branches of trade, and for compleating the commercial circle, that all nations contended for it with the greatest avidity. The English Company flourished under this exportation for a very long series of years. The Nation was considerably benefited both in trade and in revenue; and the Dividends of the Proprietors were often high, and always sufficient to keep up the credit of the Company's Stock in heart and vigour. 
But at, or very soon after, the acquisition of the territorial revenues to the English Company, the period of which may be reckoned as compleated about the year 1765, a very great revolution took place in commerce as well as in dominion; and it Avas a revolution, which affected the trade of Hindostan with all other European nations, as well as with that, in whose favour and by whose power it was accomplished. From that time bullion was no longer regularly exported by the English East India Company to Bengal, or any part of Hindostan; and it was soon exported in much smaller quantities by any other nation. A new way of supplying the market of Europe, by means of the British power and influence, was invented; a species of trade (if such it may be called), by which it is absolutely impossible that India should not be radically and irretrievably ruined, although our possessions there were to be ordered and governed upon principles diametrically opposite to those, which now prevail in the system and practice of the British Company's Administration.
  A certain portion of the revenues of Bengal has been for many years set apart, to be employed in the purchase of goods for exportation to England, and this is called the Investment. The greatness of this Investment has been the standard, by which the merit of the Company's principal Servants has been too generally estimated; and this main cause of the impoverishment of India has been generally taken as a measure of its wealth and prosperity. Numerous fleets of large ships, loaded with the most valuable commodities of the East, annually arriving in England in a constant and increasing succession, imposed upon the publick eye, and naturally gave rise to an opinion of the happy condition and growing opulence of a country, whose surplus productions occupied so vast a space in the commercial world. This export from India seemed to imply also a reciprocal supply, by which the trading capital employed in those productions was continually strengthened and enlarged. But the payment of a tribute, and not a beneficial commerce to that country, wore this specious and delusive appearance.
The fame of a great territorial revenue, exaggerated, as is usual in such cases, beyond even its value, and the abundant fortunes of the Company's Officers, military and civil, which flowed into Europe with a full tide, raised in the Proprietors of East India Stock a premature desire of partaking with their Servants in the fruits of that splendid adventure. Government also thought they could not be too early in their claims for a share of what they considered themselves as entitled to in every foreign acquisition made by the power of this kingdom, through whatever hands, or by whatever means it was made. These two parties, after some struggle, came to an agreement to divide between them the profits, which their speculation proposed to realize in England from the territorial revenue in Bengal. About two hundred thousand pounds was added to the annual Dividends of the Proprietors. Four hundred thousand was given to the State; which, added to the old Dividend, brought a constant charge upon the mixt interest of Indian trade and revenue of eight hundred thousand pounds a year; this was to be provided for at all events.
  By that vast demand on the territorial fund, the correctives and qualifications, which might have been gradually applied to the abuses in Indian commerce and government, were rendered extremely difficult. 
The practice of an Investment from the Revenue began in the year 1776, before arrangements were made for securing and appropriating an assured fund for that purpose in the Treasury, and for diffusing it from thence upon the manufactures of the country in a just proportion, and in the proper season. There was indeed for a short time a surplus of cash in, the Treasury.  It was in some shape to be sent home to its owners. To send it out in silver was subject to two manifest inconveniences:  --  First, The Country would be exhausted of its circulating medium. A scarcity of coin was already felt in Bengal, Cossim Ali Khan (the Nabob, whom the Company's Servants had lately setup, and newly expelled) during the short period of his power had exhausted the country by every mode of extortion; in his; flight he carried off an immense treasure, which has been variously computed, but by none at less than three millions sterling. A country so exhausted of its coin and harrassed by three revolutions rapidly succeeding each other, was rather an object, that stood in need of every kind of refreshment and recruit, than one, which could subsist under new evacuations. The next and equally obvious inconvenience was to the Company itself. To send silver into Europe would be to send it from the best to the worst market. When arrived, the most profitable use, which could be made of it, would be to send it back to Bengal, for the purchase of Indian merchandize: it was necessary therefore to turn the Company's revenue into its commerce. The first Investment was about five hundred thousand pounds, and care was taken afterwards to enlarge it. In the years 1767 and 1768 it arose to seven hundred thousand.
This new system of trade, carried on through the medium of power and publick revenue, very soon produced its natural effects. The loudest complaints arose among the natives, and among all the foreigners, who traded to Bengal. It must unquestionably have thrown the whole mercantile system of the country into the greatest confusion. With regard to the natives, no expedient was proposed for their relief. The cafe was serious with respect to European Powers. The Presidency plainly represented to the Directors, that some agreement should be made with foreign nations, for providing their Investment to a certain amount, or that the deficiencies then subsisting must terminate in an open rupture with France. The Directors, pressed by the large payments in England, were not free to abandon their system; and all possible means of diverting the manufactures into the Company's Investment were still anxiously sought and pursued, until the difficulties of the foreign Companies were at length removed by the natural flow of the fortunes of the Company's Servants into Europe, in the manner, which will be stated hereafter.
But, with all these endeavours of the Presidency, the Investment sunk in 1769, and they were even obliged to pay for a part of the goods to private merchants, in the Company's Bonds bearing interest. It was plain that this course of business could not hold. The manufacturers of Bengal, far from being generally in a condition to give credit, have always required advances to be made to them; so have the merchants very generally; at least, since the prevalence of the English power in India. It was necessary therefore, and so the Presidency of Calcutta represented the matter, to provide beforehand a year's advance. This required great efforts, and they were made. Notwithstanding the famine in 1770, which wasted Bengal in a manner dreadful beyond all example, the Investment, by a variety of successive expedients, many of them of  the most dangerous nature and tendency, was forcibly kept up; and even in that forced and unnatural state, it gathered strength almost every year. The debts contracted in the infancy of the system were gradually reduced; and the advances to contractors and manufacturers were regularly made; so that the goods from Bengal, purchased from the territorial revenues, from the sale of European goods, and from the produce of the monopolies, for the four years, which ended with 1780 (when the Investment from the surplus revenues finally closed), were never less than a million sterling, and commonly nearer twelve hundred thousand pounds. This million is the lowest value of the goods sent to Europe, for which no satisfaction is made. 
About an hundred thousand pounds a year is also remitted from Bengal, on the Company's account, to China; and the whole of the product of that money flows into the direct trade from China to Europe. Besides this, Bengal sends a regular supply, in time of peace, to those Presidencies, which are uneqnal unequal to their own establishment. To Bombay, tho remittance in money, bills, or goods, for none of which there is a return, amounts to one hundred and sixty thousand pounds a year at a medium. 
The goods, which are exported from Europe to India, consist chiefly of military and naval stores, of clothing for troops, and of other objects for the consumption of the Europeans residing there; and, excepting some lead, copper utensils and sheet copper, woollen cloth, and other commodities of little comparative value, no sort of merchandize is sent from England, that is in demand for the wants or desires of the native inhabitants.
When an account is taken of the intercourse (for it is not commerce), which is carried on between Bengal and England, the pernicious effects of the system of Investment from Revenue will appear in the strongest point of view. In that view, the whole exported produce of the country (so far as the Company is concerned) is not exchanged in the course of barter; but is taken away without any return or payment whatsoever. In a commercial light, therefore, England becomes annually bankrupt to Bengal, to the amount nearly of its own dealing; or rather, the country has suffered what is tantamount to an annual plunder of its manufactures and its produce to the value of twelve hundred thousand pounds.
  In time of peace, three foreign Companies appear at first sight to bring their contribution of trade to the supply of this continual drain. These are the Companies of France, Holland, and Denmark. But when the object is considered more nearly, instead of relief, these Companies, who from their want of authority in the country might seem to trade upon a principle merely commercial, will be found to add their full proportion to the calamity brought upon Bengal by the destructive system of the ruling Power; because the greater part of the capital of all these Companies, and perhaps the whole capital of some of them, is furnished exactly as the British is, out of the revenues of the country. The civil and military Servants of the English East India Company being restricted in drawing bills upon Europe, and none of them ever making or proposing an establishment in India, a very great part of their fortunes, well or ill gotten, is in all probability thrown, as fast as required, into the cash of these Companies.
 In all other countries, the revenue, following the natural course and order of things, arises out of their commerce. Here, by a mischievous inversion of that order, the whole foreign maritime trade, whether English, French, Dutch, or Danish, arises from the revenues; and these are carried out of the country, without producing any thing to compensate so heavy a loss. 
Your Committee have not been able to discover the entire value of the Investment made by foreign Companies. But as the Investment, which the English East India Company derived from its revenues, and even from its publick credit, is for the year 1783 to be wholly stopped, it has been proposed to private persons to make a subscription for an Investment on their own account. This Investment is to be equal to the sum of Pound800,000. Another loan has been also made for an Investment on the Company's account to China, of Pound200,000. This makes a million; and there is no question, that much more could be readily had for bills upon Europe. Now, as there is no doubt that the whole of the money remitted is the property of British subjects, (none else having any interest in remitting to Europe), it is not unfair to suppose, that a very great part, if not the whole of what may find its way into this new channel, is not newly created; but only diverted from those channels in which it formerly ran, that is, the cash of the foreign Trading Companies.
  Besides the Investment made in goods by foreign Companies from the funds of British subjects, these subjects have been for some time in the practice of sending very great sums in gold and silver directly to China on their own account. In a Memorial presented to the Governour General and Council, in March 1782, it appears, that the principal money lent by British subjects to one Company of Merchants in China then amounted to seven millions of dollars, about one million seven hundred thousand pounds sterling; and not the smallest particle of silver sent to China ever returns to India. It is not easy to determine, in what proportions this enormous sum of money has been sent from Madras, or from Bengal, but it equally exhausts a country belonging to this kingdom, whether it comes from the one or from the other.
But that the greatness of all these drains, and their effects may be rendered more visible, Your Committee have turned their consideration to the employment of those parts of the Bengal Revenue, which are not employed in the Company's own Investments for China and for Europe. What is taken over and above the Investment (when an Investment can be made) from the gross Revenue, cither for the charge of collection or for civil and military Establishments, is in time of peace two millions at the least. From the portion of that sum, which goes lo the support of Civil Government, the natives are almost wholly excluded, as they are from the principal collections of Revenue. With very few exceptions, they are only employed as servants and agents to Europeans, or in the inferiour departments of collection, when it is absolutely impossible to proceed a step without their assistance. For some time after the acquisition of the territorial Revenue, the sum of four hundred and twenty thousand pounds a year was paid, according to the stipulation of a treaty, to the Nabob of Bengal for the support of his government. This sum, however inconsiderable compared to the revenues of the province, yet, distributed through the various departments of Civil Administration, served in some degree to preserve the natives of the better fort, particularly those of the Mahomedan profession, from being utterly ruined. The people of that persuasion, not being so generally engaged in trade, and not having on their conquest of Bengal divested the ancient Gentu proprietors of their lands of inheritance, had for their chief, if not their sole support, the share of a moderate conqueror in all offices civil and military. But Your Committee find that this arrangement was of a short duration. Without the least regard to the subsistence of this innocent people, or to the faith of the agreement, on which they were brought under the British Government, this sum was reduced by a new treaty, toPound320,000; and soon after (upon a pretence of the present Nabob's minority, and a temporary sequestration for the discharge of his debts) to Pound160,000: but when he arrived at his majority, and when the debts were paid, the sequestration still continued. And, so far as the late advices may be understood, the allowance to the Nabob appears still to stand at the reduced sum of Pound160,000.
The other resource of the Mahomedans, and of the Gentus of certain of the higher casts, was the Army. In this Army, nine-tenths of which consists of natives, no native of whatever description holds any rank higher than that of a Subadar Commandant, that is, of an Officer below the rank of an English Subaltern, who is appointed to each Company of the Native Soldiery.
  Your Committee here would be understood to state the ordinary establishment, for the war may have made some alteration: all the honourable, all the lucrative situations of the Army, all the supplies and contracts of whatever species, that belong to it, are solely in the hands of the English; so that whatever is beyond the mere subsistence of a common soldier and some officers of a lower rank, together with the immediate expenses of the English Officers at their table, is sooner or later, in one shape or another, sent out of the country.
Such was the state of Bengal even in time of profound peace, and before the whole weight of the publick charge fell upon that unhappy country for the support of other parts of India, which had been desolated in such a manner as to contribute little or nothing to their own protection.
Your Committee have given this short comparative account of the effects of the maritime traffick of Bengal when in its natural state, and as it has stood since the prevalence of the system of an Investment from the Revenues. But before the formation of that system, Bengal did by no means depend for its resources on its maritime commerce. The inland trade, from whence it derived a very great supply of silver and gold, and many kinds of merchantable goods, was very considerable.  --  The higher provinces of the Mogul empire were then populous and opulent, and intercourse to an immense amount was carried on between them and Bengal. A great trade also passed through these provinces from all the countries on the frontier of Persia and the frontier provinces of Tartary, as well as from Surat and Baroach on the Western side of India. These parts opened to Bengal a communication with the Persian Gulph and with the Red Sea, and through them with the whole Turkish and the maritime parts of the Persian empire, besides the commercial intercourse, which it maintained with those and many other countries through its own seaports.
During that period, the remittances to the Mogul's treasury from Bengal were never very large, at least for any considerable time; nor very regularly sent; and the impositions of the State were soon repaid with interest, through the medium of a lucrative commerce. But the disorders of Persia, since the death of Kouli Khan, have wholly destroyed the trade of that country; and the trade to Turkey, by Judda and Bussorah, which was the greatest and perhaps the best branch of the Indian trade, is very much diminished. The fall of the throne of the Mogul Emperours has drawn with it that of the great marts of Agra and Delhi. The utmost confusion of the North-western provinces followed this revolution, which was not absolutely complete, until it received the last hand from Great Britain. Still greater calamities have fallen upon the sine provinces of Rohilcund and Oude, and on the countries of Corah and Allahabad. By the operations of the British arms and influence, they are in many places turned to mere deserts, or so reduced and decayed as to afford very few materials, or means of commerce. 
Such is the actual condition of the trade of Bengal, since the establishment of the British power there. The commerce of the Carnatic, as far as the enquiries of Your Committee have extended, did not appear with a better aspect, even before the invasion of Hyder Ali Khan, and the consequent desolation; which, for many years to come, must exclude it from any considerable part of the trading system. 
  It appears on the examination of an intelligent person' concerned in trade, and who resided at Madras for several years, that, on his arrival there, which was in the year 1767, that city was in a flourishing condition, and one of the first marts in India; but when he left it in 1779, there was little or no trade remaining, and but one ship belonging to the whole place. The evidence of this gentleman purports, that at his first acquaintance with the Carnatic it was a well cultivated and populous country, and as such consumed many articles of merchandize; that at his departure, he left it much circumscribed in trade, greatly in the decline as to population and culture, and with a correspondent decay of the territorial Revenue.
Your Committee find, that there has also been from Madras an Investment on the Company's account, taking one year with another, very nearly on the fame principles, and with the same effects, as that from Bengal; and they think it is highly probable, that, besides the large sums remitted directly from Madras to China, there has likewise been a great deal on a private account, for that and other countries, invested in the cash of foreign and European Powers trading on the coast of Coromandel. But Your Committee have not extended their enquiries relative to the commerce of the countries dependent on Madras, so far as they have done with regard to Bengal. They have reason to apprehend, that the condition is rather worse; but if the House requires a more minute examination of this important subject, Your Committee is willing to enter into it without delay.


EFFECT OF THE REVENUE INVESTMENT ON THE COMPANY
HITHERTO, Your Committee has considered this system of Revenue Investment, substituted in the place of a commercial link between India and Europe, so far as it affects India only: they are now to consider it as it affects the Company. So long as that Corporation continued to receive a vast quantity of merchantable goods, without any disbursement for the purchase, so long it possessed wherewithal to continue a Dividend, to pay debts, and to contribute to the State. But it must have been always evident to considerate persons, that this vast extraction oi wealth from a country, lessening in its resources in proportion to the increase of its burthens, was not calculated for a very long duration. For a while, the Company's Servants kept up this Investment, not by improving commerce, manufacture, or agriculture, but by forcibly raising the Land Rents on the principles and in the manner hereafter to be described. When these extortions disappointed, or threatened to disappoint, expectation, in order to purvey for the avarice, which raged in England, they fought for expedients in breaches of all the agreements, by which they were bound by any payment to the Country Powers, and in exciting disturbances among all the neighbouring Princes. Stimulating their ambition, and fomenting their mutual animosities, they fold to them reciprocally their common servitude and ruin.
Indeed, the Investment has not been for any long time the natural product of the Revenue of Bengal: when by the vast charge, and by the ill return of an evil political and military traffick, and by a prodigal increase of establishments, and a profuse conduct in distributing agencies and contracts, they found themselves under difficulties, instead, of being cured of their immoral and impolitick delusion, they plunged deeper into ir, and were drawn from expedient to expedient for the supply of the Investment, into that endless chain of wars, which this House, by its resolutions, has so justly condemned. At home these measures were sometimes countenanced, sometimes winked at, sometimes censured, but always with an acceptance of whatever profit they afforded.
  At length the funds for the Investment, and for these wars together, could no longer be supplied. In the year 1778, the provision for the Investment from the revenues, and from the monopolies, stood very high. It was estimated at a million four hundred thousand pounds; and of this it appears that a great deal was realized. But this was the high flood tide of the Investment; for in that year they announce its probable decline; and that such extensive supplies could not be continued. The advances to the Board of Trade became less punctual, and many disputes arose about the time of making them. However, knowing that all their credit at home depended on the Investment, or upon an opinion of its magnitude, whilst they repeat their warning of a probable deficiency, and that their "Finances bore an unfavourable aspect," in the year 1779, they rate the Investment still higher. stut their payments becoming less and less regular, and the war carrying away all the supplies, at length Mr. Hastings, in December 1780, denounced sentence of approaching dissolution to this system, and tells the Directors that " He bore too high a respect for their v characters, to treat them with the management of a piepara"tory and gradual introduction to an unplealing report. 
  He was not mistaken in his prognostick. Loans now becoming the regular resource for retrieving the Investment, whose ruin was inevitable, the Council enable the Board of Trade, in April 1781, to grant certificates for Government Bonds at eight per-cent. Interest for about Pound650,000. The Investment was fixed at Pound900,000.
  But now another alarming system appeared. These new bonds overloaded the market: those, which had been formerly issued, were at a discount; the Board of Trade was obliged to advance, therefore, a fourth more than usual to the Contractors. This seemed to satisfy that description of dealers. But as those, who bought on agency, were limited to no terms of mutual advantage; and the bonds on the new issue falling from three to eight, nine, and ten per cent, discount, the agents were unable to furnish at the usual prices. Accordingly a discount was settled on such terms as could be made; the lowest discount, and that at two places only, was at four per cent; which, with the interest on the bonds, made (besides the earlier advance) at the least twelve per cent, additional charge upon all goods. It was evident, that as the Investment, instead of being supported by the Revenues, was sunk by the fall of their credit; so the net Revenues were diminished by the daily accumulation of an interest accruing on account of the Investment. What was done to alleviate one complaint thus aggravating the other, and at length proving pernicious to both, this trade on bonds likewise came to its period.
Your Committee has reason to think, that the bonds have since that time sunk to a discount much greater even than what is now stated. 
  By this failure, a total revolution ensued of the most extraordinary nature, and to which Your Committee wish to call the particular attention of the House. For the Council General, in their letter of the 8th of April 1782, aster stating that they were disappointed in their expectations (how grounded it does not appear. 
  It is impossible, in reporting this revolution to the House, to avoid remarking with what fidelity Mr. Hastings and his Council have adhered to the mode of transmitting their accounts, which Your Committee found it necessary to mark and censure in their First Report. Its pernicious tendency is there fully set forth. They were peculiarly called on for a most accurate state of their affairs, in order to explain the necessity of having recourse to such a scheme, as well as for a full and correct account of the scheme itself. But they send only the above short Minute by one dispatch over land, whilst the copy of the plan itself, on which the Directors must form their judgment, is lent separately in another dispatch over land, which has never arrived. A third dispatch, which also contained the plan, was sent by a tea conveyance, and arrived late. The Directors have, for very obvious reasons, ordered, by a strict injunction, that they should send Duplicates of all their dispatches by every ship. The spirit of this rule perhaps ought to extend to every mode of conveyance. In this cafe, so far from sending a duplicate, they do not send even one perfect account. They announce a plan by one conveyance, and they send it by another conveyance, with other delays and other risks.
At length, at nearly four months distance, the plan has been received; and appears to be substantially that, which had been announced, but developing in the particulars many new circumstances of the greatest importance. By this plan it appears, that the subscription, even in idea or pretence, is not for the use of the Company; but that the subscribers are united into a fort of society for the remitting their privatefortunes: the goods indeed are said to he flipped on the Company's account, and they are directed to be sold on the same account, and at the usual periods of sale. For the management of this concern in Bengal they choose commissioners by their own authority. By the same authority they form them into a body; they put them under rules and regulations; and they empower them also to make regulations of their own. They remit by the like authority the duties, to which all private trade is subject, and they charge the whole concern with seven per cent, to be paid from the net produce of the- sales in England, as a rccompcncc to the Commissioners; for this the Commissioners contract to bear all the charges on the goods to the time of shipping.
The servants having formed this plan of trade, and a new com million for the conduct of it, on their private account,  --   it is a matter of consideration, to know who the Commissioners are. They turn out to be the three senior servants of the Company's Board of Trade, who choose to take upon them to be the factors of others, for large emoluments, whilst they receive salaries of two thousand pounds and fifteen hundred pounds a year from the Company. As the Company have no other fund than the new Investment, from whence they are to be paid for the care of their servants property, this commission and those salaries being to take place of their brokerage, they in effect render it very difficult, if not impossible, for them to derive advantage from their new occupation.
  As to the benefit of this plan: besides preventing the loss, which must happen from the Company's ships returning empty to Europe, and the slopping of all trade between India and England, the authors of it state. As to the combination of this mode of remittance with the Company's Investment, nothing can be affirmed concerning it until some satisfactory assurance can be held out, that such an Investment can ever be realized. Mr. Hastings, and the Gentlemen of the Council, have not afforded any ground for such an expectation. That the Indian trade may become a permanent vehicle of the private fortunes of the Company's servants is very probable; that is, as permanent as the means of acquiring fortunes in India; but that some profit will accrue to the Company is absolutely impossible. The Company are to bear all the charge outwards, and a very great part of that homewards; and their only compensation is the surplus commission on the sale of other people's goods. The nation will undoubtedly avoid great loss and detriment, which would be the inevitable consequence of the total cessation of the trade with Bengal, and the ships returning without cargoes. But if this temporary expedient should be improved into a system, no occasional advantages to be derived from it would be sufficient to balance the mischiefs of finding a great parliamentary corporation turned into a vehicle for remitting to England the private fortunes of those, for whose benefit the territorial possessions in India are, in effect and substance, under this project, to be solely held.
  By this extraordinary scheme, the Company is totally overturned, and all its relations inverted. From being a body concerned in trade on their own account, and employing their servants as factors, the servants have at one stroke taken the whole trade into their own hands, on their own capital of Pound800,000, at their own risk; and the Company are become agents and factors to them, to fell by commission their goods for their profit.
  To enable Your Committee to form some judgment upon the profit, which may accrue to the Company from its new relation and employment, they directed, that an Estimate should be made of the probable proceeds of an Investment conducted on the principles of that intended to be realized for 1783. By this Estimate, which is subjoined, it appears to Your Committee, that so far from any surplus profit from this transaction, the Bengal adventurers themselves, instead of realizing 2s 2d, the Rupee (the standard they fix for their payment), will not receive the 1s 9d which is its utmost value in silver at the Mint; nor probably above 1s 5d With this certain lots before their eyes, it is impossible that they can ever complete their subscription, unless, by management among themselves, they should be able to procure the goods for their own account upon other terms than those, on which they purchased them for their masters, or unless they have for the supply of the Company, on their hands, a quantity of goods, which they cannot otherwise dispose of. This latter cafe is not very improbable, from their proposing to fend ten sixteenths of the whole Investment in silk: which, as will be seen hereafter, the Company has prohibited to be sent on their account, as a disadvantageous article. Nothing, but the servants being overloaded, can rationally account for their choice of so great a proportion of so dubious a commodity.
  On the state made by two Reports of a Committee of the General Court in 1782, their affairs were even then reduced to a low ebb. But under the arrangement announced by Mr. Hastings and his colleagues, it does not appear, after this period of the servants investment, from what fund the proprietors are to make any dividend at all. The objects of the sale, from whence the dividend is to arise, are not their goods: they stand accountable to others for the whole probable produce. The state of the Company's commerce will therefore become an object of serious consideration ; an affair, as Your Committee apprehends, of as much difficulty as ever tried the faculties of this House. For on the one hand it is plain, that the system of providing the Company's import into Europe, resting almost wholly on an Investment from its territorial Revenues, has failed: during its continuance it was supported on principles fatal to the prosperity of that country. On the other hand, if the nominal commerce of the Company is suffered to be carried on for the account of the servants abroad, by investing the emoluments made in their stations, these emoluments are therefore inclusively authorized, and with them the practices, from which they accrue. All parliamentary attempts to reform this system will be contradictory to its institution. If, for instance, five hundred thousand pounds sterling annually be necessary for this kind of Investment, any regulation, which may prevent the acquisition of that sum, operates against the Investment, which is the end proposed by the plan.
  On this new scheme, (which is neither calculated for a future security, nor for a present relief to the Company,) it is not visible in what manner the settlements in India can be at all upheld. The gentlemen in employments abroad call for the whole produce of the year's Investment from Bengal; but for the payment of the counter-investment from Europe, which is for the far greater part sent out for the support of their power, no provision at all is made: they have not, it seems, agreed that it should be charged to their account, or that any deduction should be made for it from the produce of their sales in Leadenhall-street. How far such a scheme is preferable to the total suspension of trade, Your Committee cannot positively determine. In all likelihood extraordinary expedients were necessary; but the causes, which induced this necessity, ought to be more fully enquired into; for the last step in a series of conduct may be justifiable upon principles, that suppose great blame in those, which preceded it.
  After Your Committee had made the foregoing observations upon the plan of Mr. Hastings and his colleagues transmitted to the Court of Directors, an extract of the Madras Consultations was a few days ago laid before us. This extract contains a letter from the Governour General and Council of Bengal to the Presidency of Fort Saint George, which affords a very striking, though to Your Committee by no means an unexpected, picture of the instability of their opinions and conduct. On the 8th of April the servants had regularly formed and digested the above-mentioned plan, which was to form the basis for the investment of their own fortunes, and to furnish the sole means of the commercial existence of their masters. 
The plan of April divests the Company of all property in Bengal goods transported to Europe; but in recompence they are freed from all the risk and expense; they are not loaded with interest; and they are not embarrassed with bills. The plan of May reinstates them in their old relation; but in return their revenues in Bengal are charged with an interest of 8 per cent. on the sum subscribed, until bills shall be drawn. They are made proprietors of cargoes, purchased under the disadvantage of that interest at their own hazard. They are subjected to all losses; and they are involved in Europe for payments of bills to the amount of eighty lacks of rupees, at two shillings the rupee, that is, in bills for eight hundred thousand pounds sterling. It is probably on account of the previous interest of 8 per cent that the value of the rupee on this scheme is reduced. Mr. Hastings and his colleagues announce to Lord Macartney no other than the foregoing alteration in their plan.
It is discouraging to attempt any sort of observation on plans thus shifting their principle, whilst their merits are under examination. The judgment formed on the scheme of April has nothing to do with the project of May. Tour committee has not suppressed any part of the reflections, which occurred to them, on the former of these plans; first, because the Company knows of no other by any regular transmissions; secondly, because it is by no means certain, that before the expiration of June the governor-general and council may not revert to the plan of April. They speak of that plan as likely to be (or make a part of one that shall be) permanent. Many reasons are alleged by its authors in its favour, grounded on the state of their affairs; none whatever are assigned for the alteration. It is indeed morally certain, that persons, who had money to remit, must have made the same calculation which has been made by the directions of your committee, and the result must have been equally clear to them; which is, that instead of realizing two shillings and twopence the rupee on their subscription, as they proposed, they could never hope to see more than one shilling and ninepence. This calculation probably shook the main pillar of the project of April. But on the other hand, as the subscribers to the second scheme can have no certain assurance, that the Company will accept bills so far exceeding their allowance in this particular, the necessity of remitting their fortunes may beat them back to their old ground. The Danish Company was the only means of remitting which remained. Attempts have been made with success to revive a Portuguese trade for that purpose. It is by no means clear, whether Mr. Hastings and his colleagues will adhere to either of the foregoing plans; or indeed, whether any investment at all to that amount can be realized; because nothing but the convenience of remitting the gains of British subjects to London can support any of these projects. The situation of the Company under this perpetual variation in the system of their investment is truly perplexing. The manner, in which they arrive at any knowledge of it, is no less so. The letter to Lord Macartney, by which the variation is discovered, was not intended for transmission to the directors. It was merely for the information of those who were admitted to a share of the subscription at Madras. When Mr. Hastings sent this information to those subscribers, he might well enough have presumed an event to happen, which did happen, that is, that a vessel might be despatched from Madras to Europe; and indeed by that, and by every devisable means, he ought not only to have apprized the directors of this most material change in the plan of the investment, but to have entered fully into the grounds and reasons of his making it.
  It appears to your committee, that the ships, which brought to England the plan of the 8th of April, did not sail from Bengal until the 1st of May. If the change had been in contemplation for any time before the 13th of April, two days would have sufficed to send an account of it, and it might have arrived along with the plan, which it affected. If therefore such a change was in agitation before the sailing of the ships, and yet was concealed when it might have been communicated, the concealment is censurable. It is not improbable, that some change of the kind was made, or meditated, before the sailing of the ships for Europe; for it is hardly to be imagined, that reasons, wholly unlooked for, should appear for setting aside a plan, concerning the success of which the council-general seemed so very confident; that a new one should be proposed; that its merits should be discussed among the monied men; that it should be adopted in council, and officially ready for transmission to Madras, in twelve or thirteen days. In this perplexity of plan and of transmission, the court of directors may have made an arrangement of their affairs on the ground-work of the first scheme, which was officially and authentically conveyed to them. The fundamental alteration of that plan in India might require another of a very different kind in England; which the arrangements taken in consequence of the first might make it difficult, if not impossible, to execute. What must add to the confusion is, that the alteration has not the regular and official authority of the original plan, and may be presumed to indicate with certainty nothing more than that the business is again afloat, and that no scheme is finally determined on. Thus the Company is left without any fixed data, upon which they can make a rational disposition of their affairs.
The fact is, that the principles and economy of the Company's trade have been so completely corrupted by turning it into a vehicle for tribute, that, whenever circumstances require it to be replaced again upon a bottom truly commercial, hardly anything but confusion and disasters can be expected as the first results. Even before the acquisition of the territorial revenues, the system of the Company's commerce was not formed upon principles the most favourable to its prosperity: for whilst, on the one hand, that body received encouragement by royal and parliamentary charters, was invested with several ample privileges, and even with a delegation of the most essential prerogatives of the crown; on the other, its commerce was watched with an invidious jealousy, as a species of dealing dangerous to the national interests. In that light, with regard to the Company's imports, there was a total prohibition from domestic use of the most considerable articles of their trade; that is, of all silk stuffs, and stained and painted cottons. The British market was in a great measure interdicted to the British trader. Whatever advantages might arise to the general trading interests of the kingdom by this restraint, its East-India interest was undoubtedly injured by it. The Company is also, and has been from a very early period, obliged to furnish the ordnance with a quantity of saltpetre at a certain price, without any reference to the standard of the markets either of purchase or of sale. With regard to their export, they were put also under difficulties upon very mistaken notions; for they were obliged to export annually a certain proportion of British manufactures, even though they should find for them in India none or but an unprofitable want. This compulsory export might operate, and in some instances has operated, in a manner more grievous than a tax to the amount of the loss in trade. For the payment of a tax is in general divided in unequal portions between the vender and consumer, the largest part falling upon the latter. In the case before us the tax may be as a dead charge on the trading capital of the Company.
The spirit of all these regulations naturally tended to weaken, in the very original constitution of the Company, the main-spring of the commercial machine, the principles of profit and loss. And the mischief arising from an inattention to those principles has constantly increased with the increase of its power. For when the Company had acquired the rights of sovereignty in India, it was not to be expected, that the attention to profit and loss would have increased. The idea of remitting tribute in goods naturally produced an indifference to their price and quality; the goods themselves appearing little else than a sort of package to the tribute. Merchandise taken as tribute, or bought in lieu of it, can never long be of a kind, or of a price, fitted to a market, which stands solely on its commercial reputation. The indifference of the mercantile sovereign to his trading advantages naturally relaxed the diligence of his subordinate factor-magistrates through all their gradations and in all their functions; it gave rise, at least so far as the principal was concerned, to much neglect of price and of goodness in their purchases. If ever they showed any extraordinary degrees of accuracy and selection, it would naturally be in favour of that interest, to which they could not be indifferent. The Company might suffer above, the natives might suffer below; the intermediate party must profit to the prejudice of both.
Your committee are of opinion, that the Company is now arrived at that point, when the investment from surplus revenue, or from the spoil of war, ceasing, it is become much more necessary to fix its commerce upon a commercial basis. And this opinion led your committee to a detailed review of all the articles of the Indian traffic, upon which the profit and loss was steady; and we have chosen a period of four years, during the continuance of the revenue investment, and prior to any borrowing, or any extraordinary drawing of bills, in order to find out how far the trade, under circumstances when it will be necessary to carry it on by borrowing, or by bills, or by exportation of bullion, can be sustained in the former course, so as to secure the capital, and to afford a reasonable dividend. And your committee find, that in the first four years the investment from Bengal amounted to Pound4,176,525; upon Pound2,260,277, there was a gain of Pound186,377; and, upon Pound1,916,248, a loss of Pound705,566: so that the excess of loss above gain>> upon the whole of the foregoing capital, was in the four years no less than Pound519,229.
  If the trade were confined to Bengal, and the Company were to trade on those terms upon a capital borrowed at 8 per cent. Indian interest, their revenues in that province would be soon so overpowered with debt, that those revenues, instead of supporting the trade, would be totally destroyed by it. If, on the other hand, the Company traded upon bills with every advantage, far from being in a condition to divide the smallest per centage, their bankruptcy here would be inevitable.
Your committee then turned to the trade of the other factories and presidencies, and they constantly found, that as the power and dominion of the Company was less, their profit on the goods was greater. The investments of Madras, Bombay, and Bencoolen have, in the foregoing four years, upon a capital of Pound1,151,176, had a gain upon the whole of Pound329,622. The greatest of all is that of Bencoolen, which, on a capital of Pound76,571, produced a profit of Pound107,760. This however is but a small branch of the Company's trade. The trade to China, on a capital of Pound1,717,463, produced an excess of gain, amounting to Pound874,096, which is about 50 per cent. But such was the evil influence of the Bengal investment, that not only the profits of the Chinese trade, but of all the lucrative branches taken together, were so sunk .and ingulfed in it, that the whole profit on a capital of Pound7,045,164, reached to no more than Pound684,489; that is, to Pound189,607 less than the profit on the Chinese trade alone: less than the total profits on the gainful trades taken together, Pound520,727.
  It is very remarkable, that in the year 1778, when the Bengal investment stood at the highest, that is, so high as Pound1,223,316, though the Chinese trade produced an excess of gain in that year of Pound209,243, and that no loss of moment could be added to that of Bengal, (except about Pound45,000, on the Bombay trade,) the whole profit of a capital of Pound2,040,787, amounted only to the sum of Pound9,480.
The circumstances of the time have rendered it necessary to call up a vigorous attention to this state of the trade of the Company between Europe and India.

INTERNAL TRADE OF BENGAL
The internal trade of Bengal has next attracted the inquiries of your committee.
The great and valuable articles of the Company's investment, drawn from the articles of internal trade, are raw silk, and various descriptions of piece-goods made of silk and cotton. These articles are not under any formal monopoly; nor does the Company at present exercise a declared right of preemption with regard to them. But it does not appear that the trade in these particulars is or can be perfectly free; not so much on account of any direct measures taken to prevent it, as from the circumstances of the country, and the manner of carrying on business there. For the present trade, even in these articles, is built from the ruins of old monopolies, and pre-emptions, and necessarily partakes of the nature of its materials.
  In order to show in what manner manufactures and trade so constituted contribute to the prosperity of the natives, your committee conceives it proper to take, in this place, a short general view of the progress of the English policy with relation to the commerce of Bengal, and the several stages and gradations, by which it has been brought into its actual state. The modes of abuse, and the means, by which commerce has suffered, will be considered in greater detail under the distinct heads of those objects which have chiefly suffered by them.
  During the time of the Mogul government, the princes of that race, who omitted nothing for the encouragement of commerce in their dominions, bestowed very large privileges and immunities on the English East-India Company, exempting them from several duties, to which their natural-born subjects were liable. The Company's dustuck, or passport, secured to them this exemption at all the custom-houses and toll-bars of the country. The Company not being able, or not choosing, to make use of their privilege to the full extent to which it might be carried, indulged their servants with a qualified use of their passport, under which, and in the name of the Company, they carried on a private trade, either by themselves, or in society with natives; and thus found a compensation for the scanty allowances made to them by their masters in England. As the country government was at that time in the fulness of its strength, and that this immunity existed by a double connivance, it was naturally kept within tolerable limits.
But by the revolution in 1757, the Company's servants obtained a mighty ascendant over the native princes of Bengal, who owed their elevation to the British arms. The Company, which was new to that kind of power, and not yet thoroughly apprized of its real character and situation, considered itself still as a trader in the territories of a foreign potentate, in the prosperity of whose country it had neither interest nor duty. The servants, with the same ideas, followed their fortune in the channels in which it had hitherto ran, only enlarging them with the enlargement of their power. For their first ideas of profit were not official; nor were their oppressions those of ordinary despotism. The first instruments of their power were formed out of evasions of their ancient subjection. The passport of the Company in the hands of its servants was no longer under any restraint; and in a very short time their immunity began to cover all the merchandise of the country. Cossim Ali Khan, the second of the Nabobs whom they had set up, was but ill disposed to the instruments of his greatness. He bore the yoke of this imperious commerce with the utmost impatience: he saw his subjects excluded as aliens from their own trade, and the revenues of the prince overwhelmed in- the ruin of the commerce of his dominions. Finding his reiterated remonstrances on the extent and abuse of the passport ineffectual, he had recourse to an unexpected expedient, which was to declare his resolution at once to annul all the duties on trade, setting it equally free to subjects and to foreigners.
Never was a method of defeating the oppressions of monopoly more forcible, more simple, or more equitable: no sort of plausible objection could be made; and it was in vain to think of evading it. It was therefore met with the confidence of avowed and determined injustice. The presidency of Calcutta openly denied to the prince the power of protecting the trade of his subjects by the remission of his own duties. It was evident, that his authority drew to its period; many reasons and motives concurred, and his fall was hastened by the odium of the oppressions which he exercised voluntarily, as well as of those to which he was obliged to submit.
When this example was made, Jaffier Ali Khan, who had been deposed to make room for the last actor, was brought from penury and exile to a station, the terms of which he could not misunderstand. During his life, and in the time of his children, who succeeded to him, parts of the territorial revenue were assigned to the Company; and the whole, under the name of residency at the Nabob's court, was brought, directly or indirectly, under the control of British subjects. The Company's servants, armed with authorities delegated from the nominal government, or attended with, what was a stronger guard, the fame of their own power, appeared as magistrates in the markets, in which they dealt as traders. It was impossible for the natives in general to distinguish, in the proceedings of the same persons, what was transacted on the Company's account from what was done on their own; and it will ever be so difficult to draw this line of distinction, that, as long as the Company does, directly or indirectly, aim at any advantage to itself in the purchase of any commodity whatever, so long will it be impracticable to prevent the servants availing themselves of the same privileges.
The servants, therefore, for themselves, or for their employers, monopolized every article of trade, foreign and domestic; not only the raw merchantable commodities, but the manufactures; and not only these, but the necessaries of life, or what in these countries habit has confounded with them; not only silk, cotton, piece-goods, opium, saltpetre, but not unfrequently salt, tobacco, betel nut, and the grain of most ordinary consumption. In the name of the country government they laid on or took off, and at their pleasure heightened or lowered, all duties upon goods: the whole trade of the country was either destroyed, or in shackles. The acquisition of the Duanne, in 1765, bringing the English into the immediate government of the country in its most essential branches, extended and confirmed all the former means of monopoly.
  In the progress of these ruinous measures, through all their details, innumerable grievances were suffered by the native inhabitants, which were represented in the strongest, that is, their true colours in England. Whilst the far greater part of the British in India were in eager pursuit of the forced and exorbitant gains of a trade carried on by power, contests naturally arose among the competitors: those who were overpowered by their rivals, became loud in their complaints to the court of directors, and were very capable, from experience, of pointing out every mode of abuse.
The court of directors, on their part, began, though very slowly, to perceive, that the country, which was ravaged by this sort of commerce, was their own. These complaints obliged the directors to a strict examination into the real sources of the mismanagement of their concerns in India, and to lay the foundations of a system of restraint on the exorbitancies of their servants. Accordingly, so early as the year 1765, they confine them to a trade only in articles of export and import; and strictly prohibit them from all dealing in objects of internal consumption. About the same time, the presidency of Calcutta found it necessary to put a restraint upon themselves, or at least to make a show of a disposition (with which the directors appear much satisfied) to keep their own enormous power within bounds.
But, whatever might have been the intentions either of the directors or the presidency, both found themselves unequal to the execution of a plan, which went to defeat the projects of almost all the English in India; possibly comprehending some, who were makers of the regulations. For as the complaint of the country, or as their own interest, predominated with the presidency, they were always shifting from one course to the other; so that it became as impossible for the natives to know upon what principle to ground any commercial speculation, from the uncertainty of the law, under which they acted, as it was when they were oppressed by power without any colour of law at all; for the directors, in a few months after they had given these tokens of approbation to the above regulations in favour of the country-trade, tell the presidency.
Pressed in this urgent manner, the directors came more specifically to the grievance, and at once annul all the passports, with which their servants traded without duties, holding out means of compensation, of which it does not appear that any advantage was taken. In order that the duties which existed should no longer continue to burthen the trade either of the servants or natives, they ordered, that a number of oppressive toll-bars should be taken away, and the whole number reduced to nine of the most considerable.
When Lord Olive was sent to Bengal to effect a reformation of the many abuses which prevailed there, he considered monopoly to be so inveterate and deeply rooted, and the just rewards of the Company's servants to be so complicated with that injustice to the country, that the latter could not easily be removed without taking away the former. He adopted therefore a plan for dealing in certain articles, which, as he conceived, rather ought to be called " a regulated and restricted trade" than a formal monopoly. By this plan he intended, that the profits should be distributed in an orderly and proportioned manner for the reward of services, and not seized by each individual according to the measure of his boldness, dexterity, or influence.
But this scheme of monopoly did not subsist long, at least in that mode, and for those purposes; three of the grand monopolies, those of opium, salt, and saltpetre, were successively by the Company taken into their own hands. The produce of the sale of the two former articles was applied to the purchase of goods for their investment; the latter was exported in kind for their sales in Europe. The senior servants had a certain share of emolument allotted to them from a commission on the revenues. The junior servants were rigorously confined to salaries, on which they were unable to subsist according to their rank. They were strictly ordered to abstain from all dealing in objects of internal commerce. Those of export and import were left open to young men without mercantile experience, and wholly unprovided with mercantile capitals; but abundantly furnished with large trusts of the public money, and with all the powers of an absolute government. In this situation, a religious abstinence from all illicit gain was prescribed to men at nine thousand miles distance from the seat of the supreme authority.
  Your committee is far from meaning to justify, or even to excuse, the oppressions and cruelties used by many in supplying the deficiencies of their regular allowances by all manner of extortion. But many smaller irregularities may admit some alleviation from thence. Nor does your committee mean to express any desire of reverting to the mode (contrived in India, but condemned by the directors) of rewarding the servants of a higher class by a regulated monopoly. Their object is to point out the deficiencies in the system, by which restrictions were laid, that could have little or no effect whilst want and power were suffered to be united.
But the proceedings of the directors at that time, though not altogether judicious, were in many respects honourable to them, and favourable, in the intention at least, to the country they governed. For finding their trading capital employed against themselves and against the natives, and struggling in vain against abuses, which were inseparably connected with the system of their own preference in trade, in the year 1773 they came to the manly resolution of setting an example to their servants, and gave up all use of power and influence in 'the two grand articles of their investment, silk and piece-goods. They directed that the articles should be bought at an equal and public market from the native merchants; and this order they directed to be published in all the principal marts of Bengal.
  Your committee are clearly of opinion, that no better method of purchase could be adopted. But it soon appeared that in deep.-rooted and inveterate abuses the wisest principles of reform may be made to operate so destructively, as wholly to discredit the design, and to dishearten all persons from the prosecution of it. The presidency, who seemed to yield with the utmost reluctance to the execution of these orders, soon made the directors feel their evil influence upon their own investment. For they found the silk and cotton cloths rose 25 per cent above theft former price, and a further rise of 40 per cent was announced to them.
  


  

  
  


