                                                              February 25, 1767
  My Lord,
   The honour which I have lately received from my native city, has been much heightened by the polite and obliging manner in which your lordship has been pleased to convey it to me. I have no small satisfaction in finding that there is any thing in my character or conduct capable of recommending me to the attention of so worthy a man, and so excellent a magistrate as your lordship. The city of Dublin, in rating my endeavours, upon the partial representations of my friends, has set them much above any thing they could deserve; but they cannot overrate, I am sure, my intentions for the welfare of Ireland; for the total of which, if I were not very solicitous, I should ill discharge my duty as a member of this parliament. 
  I have much to regret, that my short stay in Dublin did not permit me to pay my respects to your lordship. Your permission, and a more favourable opportunity, will, I hope, indemnify me for that loss. I shall be extremely happy in knowing more perfectly a gentleman who has engaged my esteem and gratitude, by his general character, and by the private obligations he has done me the honour to confer upon me. I am, with the truest sentiments of esteem and regard,
  My lord,
  Your lordship's most obedient, and most humble servant,  Edm Burke
  
  August 1, 1767 My DEAR LORD,
I hope you have by this time got over a little of your Yorkshire bustle, after escaping so much to your credit from the bustle of Westminster . Your lordship's conduct has certainly been very honourable to yourself, and very pleasing to your friends. If we may judge from appearances, the consequences which have attended it are not very displeasing to your enemies. His majesty never was in better spirits. He has got a ministry weak and dependent; and, what is better, willing to continue so. They all think they have very handsomely discharged any engagements of honour they might have had to your lordship; and, to say the truth, seem not very miserable at being rid of you. They are certainly determined to hold with the present garrison, and to make the best agreement they can amongst themselves; for this purpose they are negotiating something with Charles Townshend3. Lord Bute is seldom a day out of town: I cannot find whether he confers directly and personally with the ministry, but am told he does. I saw General Conway a day or two after you left us. I never knew him talk in a more alert, firm, and decided tone. There was not the slightest trace of his usual diffidence and hesitation. He lamented your lordship's mistake in not coming into administration at this juncture. But, I declare, his conversation did, to me, more thoroughly justify your non-acceptance, than any thing I had heard, either from yourself or others, on that subject, as it laid open more clearly the ideas upon which they went in treating with you. Their plan, in short, was, that your lordship, with a few only of the chief of your friends, should take offices; and that the rest should wait those vacancies which death, and occasional arrangements, might make in a course of time. He dwelt much upon the advantages which had attended this method of proceeding, when Mr. Pitt acceded to the old administration in 1757. Though I felt indignation enough at this comparison of times and persons, I could hardly help laughing at the notion of providing for a party, upon a system which supposed the long and steady continuance of the same administration. I told him that your lordship's opinion of the duty of a leader of party was to take more care of his friends than of himself; and that the world greatly mistook you if they imagined that you would come in otherwise than in corps; and that after you had thought your own whole bottom too narrow, you would condescend to build your administration on a foundation still narrower; and give up (for that it would be) many of your own people, in order to establish your irreconcilable enemies in those situations which had formerly enabled, and would again enable them to distress, probably to destroy you.  That, beyond this, he was not less fond of a system of extermination than you were. I said a great deal, and with as much freedom as consisted with carrying on the discourse in good humour, of the power and dispositions of the Bute party, the use they had made of their power in your time, and the formidable increase and full establishment of that power, which must be the necessary consequence of the part which our former friends in office seemed just now inclined to take. This discourse had no sort of effect. The Bute influence had lost all its terrors. An apprehension of Grenville's coming in, was the ostensible objection to every thing.  Much moderation towards the king's friends, and many apologies for every part of their conduct. In the end he said (I think, directly, but I am sure in effect), that as long as the Duke of Grafton6 thought it for his honour to stay in, he could not resign. I have troubled you with this conversation, as it seemed to me very fully to indicate the true spirit of the ministry. I am quite satisfied that if ever the court had any real intention that your lordship should come in, it was merely to office, and not to administration; to lower your character, and entirely to disunite the party. This you have escaped. All of the party who are capable of judging, and supplied with materials for it, will rejoice in your escape; but there are some who feel anxious and uneasy, as if an opportunity of getting into power had missed upon mere points of delicacy. Lord Edgecumbe wrote lately to Lord Besborough: the Princess Amelia is down with him. He is frightened out of his wits: all his information comes from that quarter. Does not your lordship think, that a word from you to set the matter to rights, as to the rupture of both negotiations, might be useful with regard to him? He is wofully impatient. You see, my lord, that by giving you so free an account of my conversation with Conway, this letter is only for yourself. Lord John Cavendish' might, indeed, have given you the whole of it, as well as of his own; but I apprehend that he will have an opportunity of conveying this to your lordship, before he can see you. Be so good as to present my humble respects to my Lady Buckingham; and believe me, with the truest esteem and attachment, ought not to let the venal boroughs get engaged in the manner they are likely to be. Adieu, my dear lord; you will be so good as to forgive this tedious letter, to present my humble respects to my Lady Rockingham, and to believe me, with the greatest esteem and affection, ever your lordship's most obliged, and most obedient humble servant,
                                                                     E. Burke.

                                                                  March 9, 1768
  My Dear Lord,
I have seen the Duke of Newcastle this morning. I told him that I proposed to write to your lordship. After asking whether the conveyance was very safe, and binding me to the strictest secrecy, his grace told me that he had had lately a very satisfactory conversation with Lord Mansfield s, in which he spoke very warmly of your lordship, and in his expressions came up very near his graced own ideas with regard to you. He further gave the fullest assurances, that he had no sort of connexion with the present administration. I know not why I should trouble your lordship with this important information. That Lord Mansfield is not connected with the present ministry, we all know; that he should speak favourably of your lordship is no miracle. If, indeed, he spoke of the necessity of giving your system and your party the lead in affairs, then, indeed, he would say something to the purpose; and what I should think well worth sending an express an hundred and sixty miles to acquaint you with. I must, however, do his grace the justice to say, that he spoke of your lordship with great affection, told me, that he had acquitted himself, and with good prospect of success, of all the commissions you had given him; and that he wished to devolve upon your lordship all the consequence, credit, and influence that he had in the world. Rigby and I had joined in a request for bringing a friend in Ireland into parliament, with which he very obligingly complied; but as they got to complimenting each other on the wonderful good that must have arisen, if their ideas had been followed in the negotiation of last summer, I am afraid I said somewhat a little brusque, for which I am sorry. However, it was not a great deal; and I am to see him to-morrow, and will smooth down the feathers. Besides, the first letter from your lordship will set all to rights again. I wish it may be early and kind; for, to say the truth, he is exerting himself, and told me he had attended to Maidstone. I think him rather lower than when I saw him before. Lady Rockingham tells me the duchess is very ill.
  Of Gregory I have heard not much. Lord Winchelsea says that things look promising. I have nothing further to trouble you with. We wait with impatience to hear about York.
    I am, with the truest affection and attachment, my dear lord, 
Your ever obliged and obedient servant, 
                                                                   Edm. Burke.
  My Lady Rockingham desires that I may not smooth down the feathers, because it was but a very gentle breeze, that could hardly discompose them. Her ladyship thinks, too, that by the duke mentioning nothing about the duchess's health, it can hardly be so bad as she suspected. Mr. Frankland, Mrs. Pelham's father, is dead.
  
May 1, 1768. My Dear Shackleton,
I thank you heartily for your letter, and even for the reproaches which it contains. They are, when of that kind, very sure, and not the most unpleasing, indications of a real affection. Indeed, my neglect of writing is by no means justifiable, and does not stand well in my own opinion; but I am sorry to say it, I have never been quite correct and finished in my style of life; and I fear I never shall. However, if I keep the principal parts tolerably right, I shall, I hope, meet pardon, if not something more, from such friends as it is the great blessing of my life to have had, in every stage of it. As to the neglects of one who is but too much my brother, I have nothing to say for him. He may write himself, if he pleases; and he has nothing to prevent him but too much idleness, which I have observed fills up a man's time much more completely, and leaves him less his own master, than any sort of employment whatsoever.
  I am much obliged to Mr. Beauchamp for his kind opinion of me, and to your partial representations as the cause of it. I am willing to do my best to forward Dr. Dunkin's subscription. You may easily believe that your wishing well to it, will be sufficient to engage my endeavours (as far as they can go) without any further inducement. But Dunkin deserved some rank among the poets of our time and country; and I agree with you in thinking his son an ingenious and worthy man. I cannot, I fear, do a great deal. I am always ready to subscribe myself, and, perhaps, in general, too ready to put forward subscriptions, which weakens my interest when I want to use it on some extraordinary occasions. I don't say this as in the least declining the business you recommended, for I will certainly do all I can.
I know your kindness makes you wish now and then to hear of my situation. As to myself, I am, by the very singular kindness of some friends, in a way very agreeable to me. Again elected on the same interest, I have made a push, with all I could collect of my own, and the aid of my friends, to cast a little root in this country. I have purchased a house, with an estate of about six hundred acres of land, in Buckinghamshire, twenty-four miles from London, where I now am'. It is a place exceedingly pleasant; and I propose (God willing) to become a farmer in good earnest. You, who are classical, will not be displeased to hear that it was formerly the seat of Waller the poet, whose house, or part of it, makes at present the farm-house within an hundred yards of me. When you take a journey to England, you are obliged, by tenure, to come and pay due homage to the capital seat of your once favourite poet.
  I am glad to find my venerable old friend, your father, still preserves his health, and the even tenor of his mind. At her age, no friend could have hoped for your mother any thing but the Euthanasia; and in such circumstances, it must have been a great comfort to you that she had it so perfectly.
Mrs. Burke preserves an affectionate and grateful memory of Mrs. Shackleton's kindness to her when she was in Ireland, and joins us all in the heartiest salutations to you both.
  Adieu, my dear friend, and believe me most sincerely yours,
                                                                      E. Burke
  
                                                                July 18, 1768.
  My Dear Lord,
I intended to have written by the Duke of Portland, who was so kind as to spend a part of a day with us, but I am afraid I shall not be able to avail myself of the opportunity. Some company came upon me after his grace's departure, who have taken up my time, so that I fear he will be set out for the north, before I can send this to him. Indeed, I have little worth your hearing to communicate. Such accounts as I picked up when I was last in town, will rather serve as an excuse for my troubling your lordship, than at all contribute to your information concerning the present posture of things. Lord Shelburne still continues in administration, though as adverse and as much disliked as ever. The minister for Turin is not yet declared. I heard it said, and I believe with truth, that his majesty declined having any thing to do with the decision of this business, but recommended them to settle it among themselves, as well as they could. This does not seem to be much out of character; nor is it, I think, the most favourable symptom in the world to the power of the Duke of Grafton, who continues, as I hear, his old complaints of his situation, and his genuine desire of holding it as long as he can. At the same time, Lord Shelburne gets loose too. I know that Lord Camden, who adhered to him in these late divisions, has given him up, and gone over to the Duke of Grafton. The Bedfords are horribly frightened at all this, for fear of seeing the table they had so well covered, and at which they sat down with so good an appetite, kicked down in the scuffle. They advised that things should not be brought to extremities. They find things not ripe, at present, for bringing in Grenville; and that any capital remove just now, would only betray their weakness in the closet and in the nation. Will. Burke met Dr. Hay; they had a great deal of very serious conversation, not to say earnest and eager, on the part of the doctor. I mention it, rather to show the disposition of that faction, and the tone of their politics, than because I am sure it was meant as an opening to any future negotiation. Hay expressed a great desire of seeing you in government, upon proper terms, with the Bedfords; lamented the exclusive and proscriptive spirit of your party, which he feared would make such an union difficult; and said, that if it were not your own fault, it would be extremely easy to form a strong and permanent system. George Grenville was mentioned as a very proper matter of consideration, but he did not insist over much on that point; did not know why it should be an indispensable condition that your lordship should be at the head of the treasury; and why some other great situation, with a fair proportion of power, might not answer the purpose as well; that if Grenville was particularly exceptionable, another middle person might have the treasury: who was that middle person ? They had him in their eye, but would not name him before they knew that the general proposition would be accepted. He spoke of the ministry as a strange incoherent composition, that certainly would not stand. This he considered as a matter beyond dispute. On W. Burke's relating this conversation to me, I fancy their middle man to be the same they had in their thoughts this time twelvemonth -- Lord Gower, for they spoke much the same language, however 511 the epithet of middleman agreed with their idea. But on talking with Fitzherbert, on a certain rap of the knuckles which the Butes had given to the Bedfords, he said he wondered at it, because he knew that their style was to talk very civilly of the Butes, and even to go so far as to name the Duke of Northumberland as a proper person for the treasury, in case of the Duke of Grafton going out. This seems, if true, to let in a little light upon Hay's system. Will. Burke told him, that he did not conceive what man they could name so worthy as your lordship, of the joint confidence of parties, who had never been known to deceive any party, or any individual, or who to conduct government better, from the confidence which the whole mercantile interest had in you; besides the large and respectable following of individuals. The junction they seemed to wish, he said, had been in their own power last year, but that they were too hungry to accept it; that it would, among others, have brought them this advantage, it would have acquired them a little character. The truth is, the Bedfords will never act any part, either fair or amicable, with your lordship or your friends, until they see you in a situation to give the law to them; and all attempts towards it, before that time, will be not only useless but dangerous. I have plagued you a good deal with political chat, which you have, so far as it is authentic, probably received already in a much better manner.  We have had incessant rains. My clover is got in, in a tolerable manner, but at a heavy expense. About fourteen or fifteen acres of natural grass are down already, under a deluge of rain. The farmers here apprehend a poor harvest, as the corn has suffered a good deal whilst in the flower. I have just got an account from my friend in Ireland, that the bull will be exceedingly acceptable. At the same time that I return my thanks for him, I must entreat your lordship to order him to be sent to Mr. Felix Doran, a merchant and a friend at Liverpool, who will transmit him to Dublin.
Your lordship will be so good as to present my respects to Lady Buckingham; and to believe me, with the most sincere attachment,
    My dear lord, 
Your most affectionate and obedient humble servant, 
                                                                    Edm. Burke

    July 2, 
My Dear Lord. 
I am beyond expression obliged to your lordship for your very full, very satisfactory, and very friendly letter, which I found at home on my return from my evening walk. I wish, indeed, that so great a pleasure to me had been purchased at the expense of less fatigue to yourself, for I know and feel what an irksome task the writing of long letters is; and there was nothing I was so much surprised at, in the late Duke of Newcastle, as that immense and almost incredible ease, with which he was able to dispatch such an infinite number of letters. That employment seemed to be a sort of recreation to him. I am glad that your lordship's recreation at Harrowden was of another kind. I am sure it must be extremely serviceable, as well as delightful to you, to have enjoyed that interval of ease between the hurry of London and the hurry of Yorkshire; and it was extremely well thought on, to cut this moment of perfect tranquillity out of your busy life. I really think such moments ought to be caught and improved as often as possible.
I am very glad to find that something is to be done in Yorkshire relative to the late determination. I am quite pleased with your lordship's plan for the instructions in every particular, provided instructions (or thanks, which are tantamount but more respectful,) should be the mode proposed. But I confess I am, when the objects are well chosen, rather more fond of the method of petition, because it carries more the air of uniformity and concurrence; and, being more out of the common road, and yet, I apprehend, constitutional enough, it will be more striking and more suitable to the magnitude of the occasion. There is a further reason which weighs with me even more than the former. I observe, that the court cares very little what becomes of the people in ministerial situations, whether they are odious or not, or whether they get through their business easily and gracefully, or struggle with the most embarrassing and scandalous difficulties. What they suffer makes no impression; but I observe them to be much alarmed with whatever is brought directly into the king's presence. Nothing can tend more to bring the whole system into disrepute and disgust with him, than to see with his own eyes and hear with his own ears the effect it has upon the people. His feeling in this manner the ill consequences of the system will, I am persuaded, be the only means of bringing on that only change which can do good, I mean the change of the whole scheme of weak, divided, and dependent administrations. However, I beg pardon if I have urged this too much. The grand point, to be sure, is a strong and natural expression of dislike to our elections for Middlesex. I would just submit, whether giving thanks (so far as regards this question) for what is passed, be sufficient; but that something of a request with regard to redress and prevention, in so interesting and important a point of public liberty, should be strongly pressed. I am sure I am far from thinking your lordship's expressions on this subject to be too warm. The address ought to be firm and full of vigour; and I rather think that the thanks for the nuttum tempiM, both the first and the last, were rather too short and general. I am no great friend, in general, of long-winded performances ; but certainly the very length of these things greatly aids the impression in several instances. The Surrey address is solely confined to the Middlesex election, which is certainly the best of twoextremes. I call this an extreme, because, certainly, our voting the civil list debt1 without account, besides other proceedings, merit a very large share of censure, and might, at least, be involved in general terms. I forgot to mention a thing that just struck me, relative to that hint of general warrants. Your lordship sees that it will require some delicacy to keep up that very right idea of your lordship's, " that they should recollect to what party they are obliged for that determination," without seeming to put a studied affront on G. d'., with whom an appearance of union at this time, and on this measure, may be very necessary.
  I had yesterday, on my return from town, a note from the Duke of Richmond. It was to tell me that he proposed to dine with me on his way from Park-place. I was unluckily in London, and so missed of him.
  Sir W. Meredith's pamphlet is out, and, I believe, liked; but I know very little of what is said and done. My brother has got a present of an anonymous fowl from the West Indies. It is not ugly, and may be curious; he has sent it to Grosvenor-square, and takes the liberty of requesting Lady Rockingham's acceptance of it.
  I am afraid of detaining your servant longer. If any thing should occur, I may trouble your lordship with it another time.
Surely your lordship's sentiments about Sir George Colebrooke are as proper as possible; and I beg you will not think I presumed to press upon you things of that nature, when I knew your hands to be previously so very full. I ought to ask a thousand pardons for troubling you in any way about them; but they would have been apt to attribute my refusal to apply to ill-nature, or a worse motive, if worse there be. A thousand thanks for what you have done, which was more by a great deal than I could in reason have expected. Adieu, my dear lord, and do me the justice to believe me, with the truest and heartiest affection,
  Your lordship's ever obliged and obedient humble servant,
                                                                    Edm. Burke
  

                                                                   July 9,1769.
  Mr Dear Lord,
I was on the point of sitting down to trouble your lordship with a word or two more, on the subject of your last letter, when I heard from Will. Burke that he had seen Lord Chatham pass by, on his return from St. James's, and that he had certainly been in the closet. He did not continue there above twenty minutes. It is not yet known whether he was sent for, or went of his own mere motion. If he was sent for, the shortness of the conference seems to indicate that nothing at all has been settled. If he was not sent for, it was only humbly to lay a reprimand at the feet of his most gracious master, and to talk some significant, pompous, creeping, explanatory, ambiguous matter, in the true Chathamic style, and that's all. If, indeed, a change is thought on, I make no doubt but they will aim at the choice of him, as the pullerdown of the old, and the architect of the new fabric. If so, the building will not, I suspect, be executed in a very workmanlike manner, and can hardly be such as your lordship will choose to be lodged in, though you should be invited to the state apartment in it; -- which, however, will not be the event, whether the arrangement is made agreeably to the inclination of Lord Chatham, or of those who employ him. The plan of the court, (coinciding sufficiently with his dispositions, but totally adverse to your principles and wishes,) would be to keep the gross of the present ministry as the body of the place, and to buttress it up with the Grenvilles and the Shelburne people. This arrangement would partly resist, and partly dissipate the present storm. It would give them a degree of present strength, much wanting in this ugly crisis of their affairs, and which, it would be admitted, is considerable, without subjecting them to the effects of that plan of connexion which is the greatest of all possible terrors to the Bute faction. Whatever they may do, or threaten at court, I should fancy your lordship's conduct will not be affected by it one way or the other. If I have any guess, from public appearance or private information, it is steadily adverse (as far as there is steadiness in any of its dispositions) to your lordship, to your friends, and to your principles. Your strength is of another kind, and, I trust, a better. The sole method of operating upon them, because they have no other standard of respect, is, by fear. They will never give your lordship credit for your moderation. Your doing but little, will be attributed to your not being in a situation to do more. With regard to your own friends, a certain delicacy of management (which is one of the things in which you excel) is certainly very proper, and much in the tenor of your whole conduct; but so far as the court is concerned, the most effectual method seems to be far the best, and I could wish your lordship to choose such time, place, and manner, for carrying through the business concerning the right of election, as will have most of a sober and well-conducted energy in it, without the smallest regard to their opinions or their representations. Far from shunning the appearance of a lead in this business, it would be every way better, that they thought the whole manoeuvre as much owing to your lordship's weight in your county, and to your activity in exerting it, as to the general sense and inclination of the people, merely left to themselves. It is the true terror of those, who take the lead in the scheme of private influence, to find that the people have their leaders too, in whom they repose a perfect confidence.
  I had lately a short letter from the Duke of Richmond. As the disposition to do something relative to the right of election seems to spread and grow warmer every day, he desires to know from me, what your inclinations were with regard to this point. I informed his grace of the substance of your lordship's letter, in the shortest manner I was able; that you were far from adverse to some proceeding, but that you wished it on a plan more limited than that of the Middlesex and London, and confined nearly, if not entirely, to that single interesting point, that you seemed to prefer the method of instruction to that of petition (at least in your own county), but that you had said nothing of a definitive resolution upon that subject in your letter to me. As to the rest, I wrote pretty nearly in substance the same to his grace that I had done to your lordship. Might I presume to suggest, that just at this time he may possibly expect to hear from your lordship, by the first safe conveyance. If the letter be given to his porter, it will be sent by the coach to Goodwood.
  I saw a person who may be supposed to talk pretty much the language of the Butes, when I was in town last Wednesday. Theministers are extremely alarmed at the late proceedings in London and Surrey; and not less so at the late advices from America. In this staggering situation, I imagine, they would derive great comfort, and some support, by finding a slur cast upon the mode of petitioning. They have great terror from the circumstance of bringing the discontents of the people directly home to the king. From instructions they have but little apprehension; they are a good deal worn out, and as such are hardly fit to be employed on a business, new, unprecedented, and nationally alarming; and they know besides, I suppose, from experience, that nothing much affects at * * * * but what is directly seen and heard; and, in truth, this is the case of most weak and inexperienced people. It is from the fears of the adversary, that sometimes one must take a direction for the operations against him. I beg pardon, for opening this affair again to your lordship, especially as you have friends near you, among whom it will be discussed to your satisfaction in every particular. Your lordship has seen the Buckinghamshire advertisement. Lord Verney opened the matter to the grand jury, by telling them, that several respectable gentlemen and freeholders had applied to him to propose a meeting on the judgment in favour of Colonel Luttrell, that he had declined taking it upon him, as member for the county, but that in that capacity he was very willing toattend the meeting, and to act in conformity to their determination. There was some, though but a feeble, opposition to the meeting. When it came to the question, eleven were for it, only three against. One was neuter. The sheriff refused to advertise, on which they agreed to do it without him. The meeting is put off until, I think, the twelfth of September, or thereabouts. This measure of delay, I attribute to the politics of Stowe *. The reason assigned is, that the freeholders should be able to get their harvest in, and come in greater numbers, and with less inconvenience to the meeting. But the former I imagine to be the true reason, unless, perhaps, they may be willing to see what course is taken in Yorkshire, before they begin to move.
  I got a letter, since I began this, from Charles Townshend (Tommy's brother). He says that Pitt seemed to be in remarkable good humour, on coming out of the closet. I hear, too, that Lord Hertford, whose eldest hope has been for a long time talking opposition language in all companies, has been at Stowe. If this be true, it is probably settled for a family system, which, in my opinion, precludes all possibility of a good event. Had the first offer gone elsewhere, they might have fallen into a plan of yours, with credit to themselves, and possibly with advantage to the public. This could not be the event, either in point of reputation or safety, if under the direction of Lord Chatham, and the lead of the Grenvilles, your lordship and your friends were to make a part of an arrangement. The court alone can profit by any movements of Lord Chatham, and he is always their resource, when they are run hard. I never attempt to write any thing like news to your lordship, that, when it is done, I do not begin to think myself very foolish, considering my own distant situation, and the lingering method of conveyance. You have all this, undoubtedly, more fully and authentically from others, as well as much earlier. However, I take my chance, and am with the greatest respect and affection,
My dear lord, 
Your ever obedient and obliged humble servant, 
                                                                    Edm. Burke


  July 30, 1769. My Dear Lord,
I have had a letter from Mr. Dowdeswell, in which he spoke of being here, or meeting me at some third place, in a few days. He has written something which he wished me to see before its publication. I dare say it will be able and useful. Dr. Blackstone has answered Sir W. Meredith's pamphlet. I have not yet seen it; but it is more hot and bitter, by far, than able and satisfactory, according to the accounts I have had. The spirit of petitioning extends and strengthens. Cornwall, Wilts, and Worcester, have appointed meetings. The ministry move heaven and earth to prevent the progress of this spirit, and in some places they have succeeded. Rigby got it under in Essex. I am told he has made the same efforts, with the same effect, in Norfolk ; and he is now gone, with his friend, the provost, to oppose it in Northampton, though that is a county in which I should but little suspect a spirit of that kind, so that his work will probably be easy. I assure your lordship by every thing that I can find, that both friends and foes look with very anxious eyes towards Yorkshire. The one very eagerly expecting, the other heartily dreading, some motion of yours. I hear the language of the courtiers is, that your lordship has put a stop to the design of petitioning in your county, and they have commended you for it; but I trust you will not long suffer the disgrace of their praises. Charles Fox called to see me, and I gathered a good deal of the tone they hold from him. He talks of the Bedfords in his old strain of dislike ; but the ministry is much more united by the union of the other parties; things grow more distinct; the ministry becomes more formed; and the necessity of firmness and perseverance is every day more evident. I do believe, that the Duke of Grafton has got new and stronger assurances than ever of support, and that the court is fully determined to abide by the plan of the last session. If the humour of petitioning should become any thing like general, they must, notwithstanding all their pretended support, union, and firmness, abandon the field with disgrace. They will not dare at least to take any step towards punishing those who have been active in that obnoxious measure. But it is their intention, and it will be in their power, in case the petitioners should be comparatively few, to make an example of terror to all future attempts of expressing the sense of the people, in any other way than by the votes of the house of commons. I never looked upon this method of petition to the Crown as a thing eligible, but as a matter of urgent and disagreeable necessity. The course of thanking the members for their votes expresses, indeed, a dissatisfaction in the procedure of the house of commons, but it expresses also a submission to it; but if we mean to get redress, we must strengthen the hands of the minority within doors, by the accession of the public opinion, strongly declared to the court, which is the source of the whole mischief. I cannot, for my life, see what can be done very effectual, as long as this parliament and this ministry subsist. I was surprised not to see so much as the thanks of your grand jury to your members, in the newspaper. I should have sent it, but that I was not sure, by your not having published it yourselves, that you had not some reason for keeping it back. I should have thought the very purpose of these things to be the most extensive publication.
  As to what I was doing myself, I find it more difficult to bring it to the present state of things, than to produce something altogether new. Various matters have so dissipated me, as to hinder me from a vigorous pursuit of this object. I had some notion of casting it into the form of a letter, addressed to a person who had long been in parliament, and is now retired with all his old principles and regards still fresh and alive;  --  I mean old Mr. White '.
I wish to know whether your lordship likes this? Whether you do, or do not, you will take no notice of my design. Before I conclude, I ought to tell you that Lord Chatham passed by my door on Friday morning, in a jimwhiskee drawn by two horses, one before the other; -- he drove himself. His train was two coaches-and-six, with twenty servants, male and female. He was proceeding with his whole family (Lady Chatham, two sons, and two daughters,) to Stowe. He lay at Beconsfield, was well and cheerful, and walked up and down stairs at the inn without help. I long very much to wait upon your lordship; but until I have given Dowdeswell a meeting, it will be impossible. I have a fine turtle, at least I am told so. I believe it better to send it to York, to meet your lordship at the races, than to have it directed to Wentworth. Present my humble duty to Lady Buckingham ; her ladyship may now renew her coquetries with Lord Chatham. The equipage that he now drives is quite gay and youthful, and they may begin, as 
formerly, a negotiation about carriages and horses. 
With the greatest affection and attachment, 
    My dear lord, 
Your ever obedient and obliged humble servant, 
                                                                    Edm. Burke

  
  August 13, 1769. My Dear Lord,
I inclose Mr. Dowdeswel's letter to me. I received it this morning. I have nothing to add to it, but my earnest wishes that your lordship may take just that line which is most agreeable to dignity, to reputation, and to your own natural and just weight in your own country. What that line is, it would be great presumption in me to say with any degree of determination, when there is a difference of opinion amongst the weightiest of our friends. We are come to a great crisis; and much of the future colour of all public affairs will depend upon your lordship's conduct at this time. 
Be that conduct what it may, I shall easily persuade myself that it is right.
Will. Burke is just come from Lord Verney's. He has not been at the last general court of the East India Company, but the account I have heard is an extraordinary one. I am assured that Lord Weymouth has written to the directors, that the naval force which they had applied for would not be sent, unless the court should consent to name the commander of that force (Sir John Lindsay) one in their commission of supervisure. To send aid to the company on a condition, and that that condition should be an intrusion of a person into the ultimate direction of all their affairs, of whatever nature, appeared a proceeding very alarming. The court took fire at it, and I think with very great reason. They adjourned their determination until Tuesday, when they will receive or reject it finally. It is a bold stroke. The gang are driving at every thing, either for their friends, or those whom they hope to make such. The Butes are certainly out of humour, but don't know how to help themselves. Will. is going to town in some hurry; so that I have only to assure your lordship, that I am ever, with the sincerest regard and attachment,
My dear lord, 
Your obliged and obedient friend and servant, 
                                                                    Edm. Burke
                                       

  September, 1769. My DEAR LORD,
While I wait with some degree of earnestness for the longer letter you proposed to honour me with, permit me to thank you for the short one. It gave me as much satisfaction as I have received from almost any circumstance in my life. I do assure your lordship, that the supposed inaction of Yorkshire was a matter of greater pleasure to enemies, and of despair to friends of every sort, than can be well expressed. The well-wishers of the cause now begin to brighten up, and to entertain livelier hopes. I send you, inclosed, a letter, which I had a little time ago from Whately. He is now with me. On conversation with him, I find it to be true, which indeed I partly suspected, that a long day was fixed for the Buckinghamshire petition, in order to observe what steps were taken in other places; and to press the business or to relax in the pursuit, according to the spirit in which it should be prosecuted elsewhere, especially within the region of your lordship's influence. But, upon seeing the Yorkshire advertisement, they have prepared a number of handbills to be circulated at and after the races, and are resolved, at the same time, not to omit private applications for attendance. They are confident of a numerous and respectable meeting; though my opinion is, that they have been rather too late and too languid, considering that there are in this county strong and active interests against us. I have seen the draft of the petition. For the substance, it is very well; nothing very poignant in the expression, but nothing faulty that I could find. Some points, besides the great object of the petition, are hinted at; but there is nothing more than a hint, properly and judiciously enough put, as I apprehend. They have not yet quite settled the plan of the procedure. There is to be a meeting for that purpose to-morrow at the races; but the present idea is, that Mr. Hampden should move the petition, and that, if it should be carried, the members of parliament for the county, and resident in it, should present it to the king. Other gentlemen they did not choose to apply to on this occasion, for fear of creating a jealousy by a preference of one to another. I thought that, by all means, some gentlemen not in parliament should be added, lest it should look solely like a manoeuvre of politicians, and not the genuine sense of the county. It is a loss of which I am very sensible, that the distance makes it impossible for me to have your lordship's advice upon every step of my conduct, but I shall act as nearly upon your general ideas as I can. I perceive that Lord Temple and Mr. Grenville seem prodigiously desirous of my paying them a visit. With regard to the former, I have promised it, in case of my going to Biddlesden, and did not decline it with regard to the latter, but promised nothing. I think they wish to mark in some very public manner, that they are on no ill terms with your lordship ; and I expect, in conformity to that plan, a good deal of attention from Lord Temple at the meeting. I shall avoid going too far, not knowing how all this may end ; and, indeed, because I do not find that your lordship has at all settled how far you intend coalition with them. On this hand, I would not choose a very shy and cold behaviour, for fear of defeating any part of the end for which we met at the Thatched House, or showing any thing of disunion, or mutual dislike, in the presence of the common enemy. This kind of behaviour requires a delicacy of management, for which I do not feel myself well qualified, having ever liked a decided situation of friendship or enmity; but that is not always in my choice. I mentioned to Whately, in confidence, the doubts which prevailed among your lordship's friends, concerning the object to what the petition ought to be directed; that some of them were of opinion that the application should be made to the house of commons, and not to the crown. He told me that Mr. Grenville had originally entertained doubts pretty nearly of the same nature ; but that he is now entirely in favour of a petition to the crown, because that measure being free from any objection merely constitutional, and happening to be that which was first adopted, it would break the unity and firmness of that chain of proceeding in the several counties and towns, (upon the preservation of which the whole efficiency of this measure may very probably depend,) if we were to vary from the original mode of address; that variation, with the departure also from the latitude of the original plan, amounting to no less than a condemnation of the whole measure, as far as it has been hitherto pursued. I confess myself entirely of the same opinion. It must be of infinite importance, that the whole stream of the petitions should, as much as possible, run one way. In an affair of this sort, it will, besides, be necessary to be as simple as we can. Every new controversy will embarrass us; and in the meetings which may and ought to follow that of Yorkshire, if that county takes a road of its own, there will be two questions ; one on the merits, the other on the mode. They will have two patterns to follow; and the disputes which may arise on the preference of these modes, cannot fail of creating difficulties, which may frustrate the whole design. There is another point, too, which a little affects me. If a petition is prepared to parliament, it supposes that the other petitions, directly or obliquely calling for a dissolution of parliament, ought to have an effect; and, after all, what reason is there to believe, that the same parliament which has so haughtily rejected the petition from Middlesex, will listen to one from any other county? If a petition to the crown be voted, so far you proceed in concert with other places; and it is no inconsistency to add, if that should be thought proper, petitions also to the houses of lords and commons. I find that the people here expect, that the other counties in which your lordship's friends have a powerful interest, should follow your pattern with speed and vigour. Lancashire is by no means wholly in the hands of Lord Strange', so as to prevent the exertion of a strong spirit there, as well as in Liverpool and Lancaster; to say nothing of what may be done in the city of York, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, Cumberland, Westmoreland, &c. &c. It grows very late, and I must set off for the little meeting at the races early to-morrow. Whately is gone. Your lordship will excuse the blots, the paper, the inaccuracies of every kind. I am just this moment ill-furnished with materials or time for writing. I shall be more explicit on my return. In the mean time, I am, with the most real affection and attachment,
    My dear lord, 
Your ever obliged and obedient humble servant, 
                                                                    Edm. Burke

  
  September, 1769. My Dear Lord,
Our meeting was held yesterday; the ostensible particulars of which Lord Temple took care to transmit immediately to the newspaper. I shall not, therefore, trouble your lordship with them here. Very little pains were taken to form a striking appearance on the day; however, it proved beyond expectation. Aubrey was the only person who seemed to have acted rightly; he came into the town on horseback at the head of sixty-five freeholders. However, when we got into the town-hall, it was quite full; there were not fewer, I imagine, than four hundred, many of them substantial people, who came forward to the work with a good countenance, and an alacrity equal to that of the third regiment of guards. Every thing had been done to traverse us; the terrors of the house of commons were held over many, and the word was; "The king will despise your petitions, and then what will you do? Will you go into rebellion?" &c &c. The tories in general stayed away. O'Brien, in his speech, let fly at the Earl of Bute, and was rather for giving a more whiggish complexion to the meeting, than would be quite prudent in a county where the others were so strong, and in which some of them voted with us, though they did not choose to appear on this occasion. But on the whole he did very well. No Grenville, except George's eldest son, a very sensible boy, and as well disposed to a little faction as any of his family. We were told we should have had Harry Grenville, but Lord Temple found out that he was no freeholder in the county. His lordship, after dinner, made an apology for George's absence, declaring, that he highly approved the principles of the meeting, but thought he should be able to defend it with the greater weight if he were not present at it. This was awkward, and awkwardly delivered. At the dinner it was thought necessary that the gentlemen should not dine altogether; accordingly, Lord Temple stayed at one house, and Lord Verney and some more of us went to the other. In order to preserve a harmony in our toasts, they sent them to us from the house we had left, where they had been devised. An attempt was made to insinuate a great deal of Grenvilleism into the meeting. However, something was done a little to balance it ; and a toast that had been sent down in an improper mode, about Yorkshire, was dressed by Aubrey and O'Brien in somewhat a better manner, What think you of the three united brothers? The freeholders dined, as we did all, at a market ordinary, for which we paid our shillings. Afterwards, wine was given at the expense of Lord V and Lord T. The first part was necessary, because the freeholders had been informed that there was to be no treating; and they were to be induced to come by the moderation of the expense. The other was proper to conclude the day cheerfully, and it had a very good effect. I take it the signature will be general. Above three hundred signed upon the spot. We have not, I believe, two thousand in the county. Believe me, with the sincerest and most cordial attachment, my dear lord,
  Your ever obedient and obliged humble servant,
                                                                   Edm. Burke.
October 9, 1769. My Dear Lord,
Tommy Townshend called here on his return from a tour to the westward. We had a good deal of indifferent with some political conversation. He talked, as all the world does, of the union of the parties in opposition as a thing very happy and very certain. I threw out a good many doubts of the possibility of a cordial or safe union for us under the direction of the brothers, or of their ever consenting to act with us under any other direction. Each of them had ambition and pretensions enough when they were separate; united, their aims would certainly not be less, and their demands would be higher and more plausible. He did not see these difficulties in so strong a light as I did. I hinted that the brothers, having proclaimed their resolution to act together to the whole world, and in the strongest terms, (to say nothing of the other two,) we had not the least knowledge of the dispositions of Lord Chatham, or of what he would have pass for his dispositions, with regard to your lordship and your connexion, and that past experience had informed us of nothing but his enmity to your whole system of men and opinions. He has had some conversation with Lord Chatham, but seemed very reserved in delivering an opinion on his sentiments, if, in reality, he has had an opportunity of forming any. Lord Chatham, he said, took every opportunity of speaking in the highest terms of Sir Chas. Saunders and Admiral Keppel, not only as great men in their profession, but as persons of the greatest honour and integrity. The frequent mention which was made of them, persuaded Townshend that he wished them to take some opportunity of paying him a visit, as it were to congratulate him on the restoration of his health; and that he desired it, with a view of opening himself to them with more fulness and confidence in relation to your party. Townshend being a mutual friend, and having been formerly an internuncio between you, I consider what he said to him as an oblique message. He desired me to communicate these conversations with Lord Chatham; I said I would to your lordship, but not to Keppel and Saunders; but told him that the better way for him would be to call upon you himself, and to talk over the matter, when your lordship should return from Newmarket. Very possibly you have already seen him, and have heard more than I relate. I take Townshend to be a very honest and safe man, and yet. considering his connexion with Lord Chatham, perhaps I opened to him my own political creed with too little reserve ; however, I told him that they were only my private sentiments, unauthorized by your lordship or any of the principal persons in your connexion; indeed, they were perhaps more than it would be prudent for any person of weight to deliver to any other than very confidential people just at this moment; and yet I foresee that it will be necessary to declare something like them strongly and openly. But, at this minute your lordship has, undoubtedly, a very delicate game to play, in which you cannot disavow this supposed union without giving great advantages to the common enemy; or admit too much of it, without the risk of putting yourself in the power of your allies, on the one hand, or giving them a pretence to charge you with breach of faith, on the other. I beg to put your lordship in mind of little Stuart, in his pursuit of the secretaryship to the arts and commerce. When I showed his letter to Sir George Saville, at Doncaster, I had no answer. I hope he is not engaged. The Quarmes are members. If your lordship should desire me to come to London I have nothing to prevent it. I am with the greatest truth, my dear lord,
  Your ever obliged and obedient humble servant,
                                                                    Emm. Burke


1769
MY DEAR LORD,
I send you a good part of what I have been meditating about the system of the court, and which you were so earnest to see carried into execution. I thought it better to let you see what was finished, rather than to postpone it until the whole was completed. The design appears distinctly enough, from what has been done. If you and your friends approve of it, you will be so good to send it back, with your observations, as soon as possible, that it may go to the press; when I have got through the concluding part, you shall have that also, and on its return, it shall follow the rest.
  It will be a matter very proper for the consideration of your lordship and your friends, whether a thing of this nature should appear at all. It is, in the first place, a formal attack upon that object which has been nearest and dearest to the court since the beginning of the reign; and of course, if this thing should be supposed to express your sentiments, must put you on terms irreconcilably bad with the court and every one of its adherents. I foresee, at the same time, that the other bodies who compose the opposition, will desire "not to be comprehended in these declarations," as GG said, upon such an occasion, two years ago, so that you irritate, past forgiveness, the court party, and you do not conciliate all the opposition. Besides, I am very far from confident, that the doctrines avowed in this piece (though as clear to me as first principles) will be considered as well founded, or that they will be at all popular. If so, we lose upon every side.
  As to myself, I am indifferent about the event. Only, for my credit, (as I fear from some particular opinions, and from this extensive previous communication, I shall be considered as the author,) I wish, that if our friends approve the design, I may have some tolerable support in parliament, from the innumerable attacks it will bring upon me. If this be successful with the public, I shall have enough of odium; I could wish it a little divided, if the sentiments should belong to others as well as to myself; for it is upon this presumption, and with this view only, that I mean to publish. In order that it should be truly the common cause, make it at your meeting what you please. Let me know what ought to be left out, what softened, and what strengthened. On reading it to Will and Dick, they thought some things a little too ludicrous. I thought much otherwise, for I could rather wish that more had occurred to me, (as more would, had my spirits been high,) for I know how ill a long detail of politics, not animated by a direct controversy, wants every kind of help to make it tolerable.
The whole is, in a manner, new cast, something to the prejudice of the order, which, if I can, I will rectify, though I fear this will be difficult. The former scheme would no ways answer, and I wish I had entirely thrown it aside, as it has embarrassed me a good deal. The whole attack on Pitt's conduct must be omitted, or we shall draw the cry of the world upon us, as if we meant directly to quarrel with all mankind.
  My brother is ordered to Grenada, though his leg is not yet in a condition, as his surgeons tell him, and as he feels, to conflict with that climate. If he goes, he goes, I fear, to death; if he stays, he loses his place, with the mortifying circumstance of accommodating an enemy. This is not pleasant to me.
You will present my compliments to your company, with whom, though absent, I am present in spirit; I am, to them and to your lordship, what ever I ought to be, most sincerely and affectionately your attached and obedient humble servant,
                                                                   Edm. Burke.
  I forgot to mention an application to me from a Mr. Tyson on the part of a Mr. Mackinnon, a gentleman of Antigua, of considerable fortune, who lives at Southampton. He has some notion of attacking the members there, and has sent this Mr. Tyson to declare his attachment to your lordship's interests in politics. As I must understand his intention, I told him that your lordship's friends had resolved, as a general maxim, on not promising an election support, in a parliamentary character, to any person directly or indirectly; this, as strong as I could. I have since been desired to know what your lordship's answer is. May I venture, from you, to repeat what I told him, as a general principle of the party.
  
  
October 29, 1769. My Dear Lord,
I am infinitely obliged to your lordship for your long and satisfactory letter, which I concealed or communicated in the manner I thought most agreeable to your wishes. I found Lord Albemarle had not received the copy your lordship intended for him; I therefore showed him mine, and let Mason make a copy of it for Keppel and Saunders, when they should come to town. I showed it, besides, to Lord J Cavendish and Lord Frederick. They all concurred very nearly in sentiment with your lordship, upon every particular. There was some doubt, whether our two friends ought not to pay the visit which, it seems, is desired, in order to hear at least what style he' uses, and what sentiments he would be believed to entertain; but they will do nothing without your desire. For my own part, the more I think of it, the more perfectly I am convinced that we ought to take no sort of notice of him, but to proceed exactly as if no such man existed in the world. For though, according to Lord Camden's phrase, Lord Chatham has had a wonderful resurrection to health, his resurrection to credit and consequence, and to the power of doing mischief, (without which last his resurrection will be incomplete,) must be owing to your lordship and your friends. It ought never to be forgotten, how much the late Duke of Newcastle hurt himself, in his interest very often, in his reputation almost always, by his itch of negotiation. If Lord C has anything to communicate to these gentlemen, he may send for them. This union of the three brothers will distract the country as much in future, as their dissensions did formerly. I quite agree with your lordship, that Grenville is the most temperate and manageable of the three ; but he is no longer George Grenville, a disengaged individual, but one of the triumvirate, to whom, by the way, he brings all the following that they possess. Nothing can be said of him, but what can be said, with equal truth, of the other two, from whom, I really believe, he will never disconnect himself. All these considerations make me wish, as ardently as your lordship's partiality can do, that my little scheme was in a way of being speedily completed. I see, I feel, the necessity of justifying to our friends and to the world, the refusal, which is inevitable, of what will be thought very advantageous offers. This can only be done by showing the ground upon which the party stands, and how different its constitution, as well as the persons who compose it, are from the Bedfords, and Grenvilles, and other knots, who are combined for no public purpose, but only as a means of furthering, with joint strength, their private and individual advantage. I am afraid I shall never compass this design to my mind. Hitherto I have been so variously distracted, that I have made but little progress, indeed none; but to-day I began to set to work a little seriously. But, in order to produce something which, by being timely, may be useful, I must beg to be excused from going to Yorkshire in the next month. This would break me to pieces, and I think I may do more service here. Perhaps I may be able to send something for your consideration at that meeting.
Your lordship's conversation with the king's friend was curious. I can be at no loss for the person. I am told he talks very loud opposition; but let him, or the rest of his corps, talk what language they will, it will, translated into plain English, signify nothing but a repetition of the old system; nor can it be thought that by sending for Lord Chatham, they mean any thing else than to patch a shred or two, of one or more of the other parties, upon the old Bute garment, since their last piecing is worn out. If they had been dissatisfied with the last botching of Lord Chatham, they would not have thought again of the same workman. Perhaps, for that reason, (if any thing of the kind is worth a second thought,) it might be as well not to suggest any thing of our dislike of that person to any one of the sacred band; as their opinion of our disunion will rather fortify the court in its resolution of employing him in the formation of another of their expedient administrations. Indeed, as far as I can guess at their designs, by the discourses of last winter, or the beginning of summer, (for lately I have heard nothing,) they had no one point at heart but the perpetual exclusion of your lordship, and your whole system. Therefore, any look towards courts or courtiers, their liking or their displeasure, can be no plan for us. I am infinitely pleased with the resolution in Derbyshire; not so much for the addition of the voice of that county, but as its silence would, and indeed did, look like a renunciation of the conduct held in other places. I have no kind of doubt of a sufficient majority in Lancashire against all the interest and all the efforts of Lord Strange. The difficulty will be in the calling of the meeting; but I should think that half-a-dozen principal gentlemen would be sufficient; and the trading and manufacturing towns would do the rest. Besides, I take it for granted, that our friends, Sir F. Standish and Sir Peter Lyster, would exert themselves. I see, by the paper, that something is likely to be stirred in Lincolnshire. Your lordship, no doubt, recollects how necessary the co-operation of Lord Scarborough and Lord Monson will be, to the success of a petition there. Nothing, as yet, of Nottingham; Cumberland likewise sleeps. Is it not most certain, that the latter county might be easily brought into a petition on the Duke of Portland's giving it his countenance?
Since I began this letter, which was two or three days ago, I have done something, not wholly to displease myself, in the beginning of the pamphlet. It was necessary to change it wholly from the manner in which you saw it, and I think the change has not been for the worse. Unluckily, I am broke off from it for about a week. Lord Verney seems a little hurt that I have not been to see him. I shall go to him to-morrow, and stay till Saturday. While I am there, I propose to pay a visit at Stowe. Not coming directly from Yorkshire, it will have no appearance of a political advance: and not shunning the visit, will not look as if a hostile air was meant to be preserved, if the conversation should veer, as it must, towards politics. This is the line I intend to preserve to the best of my power. There has been much talk of the chancellor; his opinions, dispositions, going out, or staying in; but for my part, I look upon it all in the usual strain, of distressing the ministers into some bargain advantageous to him ; or in the style of Lord Chatham's politics, to keep hovering in air, over all parties, and to souse down where the prey may prove best. It is thought Wilmot will be chosen to succeed him, if they cannot make up matters among themselves; and I think they have it in their power to make it worth his while to accept. I long to hear how they go on in Ireland, and imagine I shall soon have a good account: if I should learn any thing satisfactory, your lordship shall have it in a short time. Stuart will, I hope, succeed in his little pursuit. He has been a great attender on that society; but if he had never set his foot within their doors, he has but too much abilities for their paltry business. I heard, accidentally, a report which gave me much concern, of your lordship being ill, and confined to your bed ; but being informed it was nothing more than a boil, and knowing what good effects such eruptions have on your health, I was at length rather pleased. I beg leave to present my respects to Lady Rockingham. Believe me, my dear lord, with the greatest truth and affection,
  Your ever obedient and obliged humble servant,
                                                                          Burke

  
  
                                       .

