   November 6, 1769. My Dear Lord,
Will Burke and I spent the best part of last week with Lord Verney, and in a manner much to our satisfaction. We paid a morning visit to Stowe, where we found Lord Temple alone. We passed about three hours in the gardens. I was prepared to find them grand and extensive, but insipid; however, it turned out otherwise. I thought many parts very interesting, and the whole as well managed as one could expect, from grounds which had been improved upon two very different ideas; and where the revolution of taste had signalized itself upon the same objects. Be they what they may, it was impossible that the gardens or gardening should engross us entirely during our walk. We had a great deal of political conversation. He was in good humour, and his manner was fair and open. Without seeming offended, the turn of his discourse indicated at times that he had heard of your lordship, and your friends, expressing a disrelish to their junto, though he did not speak out upon it so clearly, as to make me quite satisfied that this was his meaning. He said that as we had got to see one another, and to act together, he hoped there would be no retrospect, no charge, and no recrimination. That we had done each other a thousand acts of unkindness; let us make amends by a thousand acts of friendship. He was of opinion that, let what would happen, the great point for us, and the country, would be, to get rid of the present administration, which could only be effected by the appearance of union and confidence. He said, and he repeated it, that, to be sure, there was no treaty, expressed or implied, to bind the parties in honour to one another, or to any measure, except the establishment of the rights of the freeholders. In every thing else, we were both free:    --    "we were both free to play the fool as much as we pleased, mark that." He said these last words with a good deal of emphasis. Lord Chatham, he told us, was exceedingly animated against the ministry. He was uneasy that the meeting of parliament was postponed; lest a fit of the gout should intervene, though no moderate fit should keep him from the House of Peers on the first day of the session. His opinion is, that the affair of the Middlesex election should be taken up in that house, as well as the House of Commons. I can draw no certain inference from the last part of our discourse with Lord Temple, as it was rather in a matter of general speculation, than the business of the day. We talked of the court system, and their scheme of having dependent administrations. I spoke of this as the reigning evil; and particularly mentioned the favourite idea, of a king's making a separate party for himself. He said this latter did not seem so bad a thing, if Lord Bute had not spoiled it. I said I thought it was mischievous, whether Lord Bute had a hand in it or not, and equally so. He contented himself with repeating his observation, as I did by repeating mine, and we said no more upon this subject. On the whole, I was glad to find that we understood one another thoroughly, on the nature and extent of our coalition; which once being mutually explained, will not render it necessary to say any thing upon it publicly, so as to give an advantage against us to the common enemy. I forgot to mention any thing to your lordship on the revolution in the India House. Indeed, I do not wonder that I should, the misfortunes which my friends have met with there, make it a subject on which I do not like to turn my thoughts. Sullivan has gone over to the court. When I was told this, I said to my informer, as I do to your lordship, that I could not blame him. His consequence in the India House is much more material to him than his rank in parliament; and as the whole opposition, in a manner, disclaimed and persecuted him, what tie bound him from disclaiming them, and looking for support wherever he could find it? How he has arranged with Lord Shelburne, with whom he was generally supposed in connexion, I know not; but nobody else had any claim upon him. Neither Lord dive's conduct in the Grenville administration, nor the attachment he has chosen since, put him one bit higher with me; indeed, he has not so much to be said in his favour. As to Sir George Colebrooke, he is just what I always thought him. He has shown himself even an enemy to poor Thibot Bourke; but in the present circumstances, his conduct is natural to people of his constitution, and we must submit to it. I turn rather to a better subject, which this brings to my mind. It is Dempster's conduct on the occasion. He thought, as I do, about Sullivan's coalition. He told him that it should make no difference in his line in the India House; that there he would as firmly stand by him, as he would continue to oppose his new friends in parliament; that his political connexion was with your lordship only, and would always be so, but that if Mr. Sullivan should find that course of conduct prejudicial to his interests in Leadenhall-street, that he would, at an hour's notice, disqualify for the directorship. This was what I expected from Dempster, in an affair like this; not to sacrifice one duty to another, but to keep both if possible, if not, to put it out of his power to violate the principal.
When I got home I returned to my business, which I did not quite neglect whilst I was at Lord Verney's. I find I must either speak very broad, or weaken the matter, and render it vulgar and ineffectual. I find some difficulties as I proceed; for what appear to me self-evident propositions, the conduct and pretences of people oblige one formally to prove; and this seems to me, and to others, a dull and needless labour. However, a good deal of it- will be soon ready, and you may dispose of it as you please. It will, I am afraid, be long. On my coming home I found, by woful experience, that one of the news-printers has got a country-house at Beconsfield. The old man that milks my cows and the old dairy-maid had married, and he has made a flaming paragraph of it. I suppose I shall be the subject of news enough, if this be the case. Hut I have sent a formal message, to beg myself off in the particular of my family here. I do not hear a word of news worth your notice. The speech I inclosed to you in my last', is to be the subject of some animadversions from Wilkes. This, I am told, is a half-secret. I am sorry, just now, that he should abuse him; for if it be well done, the ministry will triumph; if ill, Wilkes will lower himself, which will please them no less; besides, it may be thought that h^ is encouraged by me, or some of your lordship's friends. Will takes this to town, whither he goes to correct the sheets of Dowdeswel's pamphlet. I have, I believe, tired you; and so shall take my leave, by assuring you that I am, with the most cordial attachment, 
                                 My dear lord,
  Your ever obliged and obedient humble servant,
                                                                    Edm. Burke
  I hope the Lord Cavendishes have taken care to secure a full meeting at Derby. It will be very awkward if they should have neglected this essential step. Dowdeswell has desired me to go to Yorkshire with him on the 13th. I foresee, that if I do, this business of mine will come to nothing, so I think I must decline it, for I really think something of the sort wanting; besides, we are to present the petition on Friday se'nnight. Your lordship will be so good as to present Mrs. Burke's and my respects to Lady Rockingham.

                                                              November 14, 1769
  My Dear Lord,
I came to town, a day or two ago, in order to attend our county petition; but a violent defluxion having fallen on Lord Verney's eyes, which has sentenced him to some medical operations, we are obliged to postpone the presenting it until some day next week; it will be Wednesday, I believe. On my way to town, I saw a person who has connexions with the Pitt family. He entertained me with an account of the present state of Lord Chatham's politics: violent, as before, against the ministry; determined to come out on the first day of the session; fixed upon three grand points  --  Corsica for foreign affairs, America for home policy, the right of election as a constitutional principle; that it was necessary that an administration should be formed in which the people might have some confidence; that it ought to be formed upon whig principles; that the Rockinghams and Cavendishes, and such ancient whig families, who had ever been true to their principles, and consistent in their conduct, ought to take the lead in such an administration. While I was thinking on all this, I got home, and found that Lord Temple had been here, and left word that he wished to see me. When I called upon him yesterday, I found that he desired only to settle matters about the presentment of the petition. However, this matter was dispatched in a few moments, and he entered much more largely into politics. He expressed the most earnest desire of the union of all the parties into one, wished that all memory of past animosities might be worn away, and stated very strongly, and, as I since found, very truly, the hopes which the court built on the supposed impossibility of such an union. I told him that I believed no union could be formed of any effect or credit, which was not compacted upon this great principle    --    "that the king's men should be utterly destroyed as a corps,"    --    to which he assented very heartily. He seemed very solicitous that your lordship should come to town early; and laid open some particulars for a plan of opposition in the next session, so like our own general lines, that I think it unnecessary to trouble your lordship with them. At Stowe our conversation was guarded and cold; here it was otherwise, upon his part; on mine, I was nearly as reserved as before; not that I could, or did, other than express my wishes for a proper union, provided it were honourable and safe for all parties; neither did I disagree with him in opinion, that a great deal of the effect of our opposition depended upon it, as well as the formation of a proper system, whenever you should be called upon to compose it. Afterwards I saw Keppel, who has received a much more direct message from Lord Chatham than the former: the substance is nearly the same with my information, containing a strong declaration of his resolution never to act but with your lordship and your system, with many high praises of both. I shall tell you no more, because I take it for granted that Keppel will give you a distinct account of the whole.
  I cannot now send the rest of my pamphlet. It is not in order, nor quite finished even in the scheme; but I wish that, if you approve what is done, you may send it back; for it ought not now to have a moment's delay. Many rumours of war here; but I know not well how they are founded. My hearty regards to Mr. Dowdeswell. I hope he likes the manner in which his book is printed. I shall order a parcel to be sent down and charged to your lordship, that they may be fully dispersed in the north; for I am convinced that men want arguments, to reconcile their minds to what is done, as well as motives, originally to act right. With the most real affection and attachment,
                                   My lord,
  Your ever obliged and obedient, humble servant,
                                                                   Edm. Burke.

   Decembers, 1769
  My Dear Lord,
I wait, with some impatience, the return of the papers, with your observations and corrections. If ever, they ought to appear as soon as possible. I am drawing to a conclusion, but I do not send this manuscript; partly, because it is not yet arranged to my mind; partly, because I expect soon to see your lordship in London. Your friends wish it very generally and warmly. They stand in a situation which happens, just now, to be rather awkward. Not that we are come so near a crisis, as some people imagine; very far from it, in my opinion. However, as your coming to town speedily can advance your own former determination but by a very few days, would it not be better that you were a little nearer to the centre, in order the more readily to collect your friends; and, in the mean time, to give them the tone which they ought to hold, at a time when it is not easy to say any thing which may not have a construction not pleasant to us upon the one side or the other, and when an affected silence may be as bad as an imprudent declaration? As to the Grenvilles, I am now satisfied that they have hitherto laboured, by every method, to give the world an impression that our junction is complete, and that the basis of it is their superiority in the arrangement. This appeared to me so much past all doubt, when I was in town, (from a story with which it is too long to trouble you now,) that I thought it necessary to be very explicit upon that subject, let the consequences be what they would; guarding, however, against any thing that should express any enmity towards these allies. I do by no means think that Lord Chatham goes with them as entirely as they think, or will make himself so subservient to the aggrandizement of their family, as they wish him to be. Not that I rely much on this speculation of my own, as perhaps I could not explain quite clearly the principles which lead me to it. I saw the Duke of Richmond. He is, I am sorry to say it, far from well. His opinion and affections are as they used to be; and his conversation, I believe, without the least disguise. He has so much aversion to the Grenvilles, and, unknown to himself, is biassed so much towards Conway, that I do not think his judgment so disengaged upon that point as upon any other. However, I gave him a very full detail of all that came to my knowledge since his departure; so that the whole is pretty well before him, towards forming an opinion when you come to town, and bringing him to you from Goodwood.
  I hope the Yorkshire petition is in forwardness, and will now be presented. Calcraft gave me the inclosed names, wishing that I would get some friends to forward their petition. That man's appearing in a cause, though unlucky to it, does not discredit it entirely. The only effect it has, is that which I have long seen, with infinite grief, from the coldness and dilatoriness of many of our friends in their manner of acting. Bold men take the lead to which others are entitled, and they soon come to a power not natural to them, by the remissness of those who neither know how to be effectual friends or dangerous enemies, or active champions in a good cause. They complain of the unnatural growth of such people, and they are the cause of it. When the gentlemen of the county of Kent abandoned the rights of their dependents and adherents, the freeholders of their county, it was but natural that they should abandon them, and look for protectors wherever they could find them. However, I send your lordship the list of the names, to forward this business as you think best. I hope in God this last illness does not continue. Much hangs upon your life and health. I heartily wish well to both on that account. Will you permit me to say, that I wish it from motives of a more personal regard and affection, which is very much due and very real. Present my most humble respects to Lady Rockingham, and believe me ever,
My dear lord, 
Your most attached and obedient humble servant, 
                                                                    Edm. Burke

  August 15, 1770. My Dear Shackleton,
My wife has had a very long illness; it was a slow fever, with frequent appearances of amendment and frequent relapses. She was confined to her bed for above two months, and reduced in strength and in flesh beyond any thing that can be imagined. But, I thank God, she is now up again, in good spirits, and getting forward in strength as fast as can be expected from the miserable lowness into which she was fallen. As to poor Richard, he is, I hope, by this safe in Grenada. His health was not very good, and the strength of his broken leg by no means thoroughly restored at his departure. But he was to look for no favour or indulgence from our present rulers, who even attempted to take his employment from him; but in this lesser, as in many greater instances of their malignity, they defeated their own purpose by the bungling method of the execution; and from shame they found themselves obliged to restore him to his office, but under strict orders for departure, notwithstanding the testimony of the king's surgeon concerning the state of his leg. I think we may hear from him about the end of this month or early in the next. Fie goes into a bad climate, among worthless and disagreeable people; but I hope the goodness of Providence, in his favour, is not yet exhausted. However he may partake of my own inattention in writing, I do assure you he never failed to remember you with the sincerest affection. I am glad that you find some entertainment in the "Thoughts."  They have had, in general, (I flatter myself) the approbation of the most thinking part of the people, and the courtiers admit that the hostility has not been illiberal. The party which is most displeased, is a rotten subdivision of a faction amongst ourselves, who have done us infinite mischief by the violence, rashness, and often wickedness of their measures. I mean the Bill-of-Rights people; but who have thought proper at length to do us, I hope, a service, by declaring open war upon all our connexion. Mrs. Macaulay's performance was what I expected; there are, however, none of that set who can do better; the Amazon is the greatest champion among them. Mrs. Shackleton is very stout in daring to encounter her; but she would find herself unequal, for no heroine in Billingsgate can go beyond the patriotic scolding of our republican virago. You see I have been afraid to answer her. As to our affairs, they remain as they have been; the people, in general, dissatisfied; the government feeble, hated, and insulted: but a dread of pushing things to a dangerous extreme, while we are seeking for a remedy to distempers which all confess, brings many to the support, and most to a sort of illhumoured acquiescence, in the present court scheme of administration. As to our friends, we continue our old ground: a good harmony subsists, at least in appearance, between the capital members of opposition. Lord Chatham behaved handsomely in rejecting the idea of a triennial parliament, which the jury of London, at the instigation of the Bill-of-Rights men, thought proper to fasten upon him in order to slur us, and to get some name of consequence to patronize their madness. I suppose you have seen his answer in the papers. Indeed, the idea of short parliaments is, I confess, plausible enough; so is the idea of an election by ballot; but I believe neither will stand their ground when entered into minutely, and with a reference to actually existing circumstances. If no remedy can be found in the dispositions of capital people, in the temper, spirit, (and docility too) of the lower, and in the thorough union of both, nothing can be done by any alterations in forms. Indeed, all that wise men even aim at is to keep things from coming to the worst. Those who expect perfect reformations, either deceive or are deceived miserably. Adieu, dear Shackleton. Remember Mrs. Burke, and all of us, with much regard to your wife and your 
Most faithfully yours,
                                                                    Edm. Burke

  September 8,1770. My DEAR LORD,
Yesterday Mr. Bullock was elected, without opposition, for Wendovcr. Mr. Collins left the place early that morning without standing the poll; after having made fruitless efforts for some days before. By this feeble attempt, I hope the borough is more and more confirmed to Lord Verney; and a few common arrangements will, I trust, be sufficient to keep it so. I wish your lordship joy of another friend in parliament. The event of this election has removed no small burthen from my mind.
  I have been informed by the St. James' Chronicle, that the gentlemen of Yorkshire are determined upon a meeting. The advertisement is signed respectably. The circumstance of the sheriff's refusal to concur, seems rather fortunate. It gives an opportunity to show how strongly the sense of the weightiest people of the count, inclined against the court doctrine of election and reprobation. I make no doubt that your plan will be judiciously settled, and spiritedly pursued. If no step at all had been taken during the summer, I should be apprehensive that such a stagnation would have been little less than fatal to the cause. The people were very much and very generally touched with the question on Middlesex. They feel upon this, but upon no other ground of our opposition. We never have had, and we never shall have, a matter every way so well calculated to engage them, and if the spirit which was excited upon this occasion were suffered to flatten and evaporate, you would find it difficult to collect it again, when you might have the greatest occasion for it. Opposition is upon narrow and delicate ground, especially that part of opposition which acts with your lordship; you and your friends having exceedingly contracted the field of operation upon principles of delicacy, which will in the end be found wise, as well as honourable. However, the scantiness of the ground makes it the more necessary to cultivate it with vigour and diligence, else the rule of exiguum colito will neither be good farming, nor good politics.
I do not take the liberty of throwing out these hints, from any opinion that it is necessary to use extraordinary means to keep the spirit alive in Yorkshire, but from a strong conviction of the propriety at least of extending it to other places, and among other interests, who have hitherto acted with you in this point. People will be apt to attribute a want of communication to one of these two causes; either that the business was undertaken in Yorkshire, and carried contrary to your lordship's wishes, or that your confidence is entirely alienated from your political confederates. The former, I take it for granted, cannot be true, and if it were, cannot in policy be assigned as the ground of your reserve. The latter, when you have no complaint to make of the other parts of opposition, might be considered as a style of proceeding less fair than has been usual with your lordship, and would give them the more colourable pretence of complaint, as it is known that the first proposal for a coalition in this business came from your lordship through Mr. Dowdeswell; and however you might be supposed free to show what reserve or confidence you pleased upon other matters, they would think that they had little less than an actual right to expect communication in all steps relative to the Middlesex decision. If it should be thought proper that other parts should follow the example of Yorkshire, this communication would become the more necessary, that time and means might be furnished for proper dispositions. If your lordship should think it right to let the matter rest upon the Yorkshire proceeding, people may be desirous of knowing the grounds upon which it went so far, and yet was to be carried no further. I am informed that the idea entertained in Yorkshire is, that of an instruction to the county members. To me it appears that every objection which lay to that method last year exists, with at least equal power, in the present. I say this on a supposition that I have a right idea of the plan of the instructions. A motion to be made in parliament for censuring those who advised the king not to listen to complaints against that identical parliament itself! What arguments could be used in support of such a motion? It really appears to me with a very unparliamentary air. If indeed the members should be instructed to move a Bill for rescinding that obnoxious judgment, and providing in future for the right of election, and if such a bill should not be carried, to decline a further attendance on parliament, this would have a more practicable aspect, in the former part of it, and some appearance of spirit and energy in the latter. The other plan could only appear intended for the purpose of a day's angry debate, and that, in my humble opinion, but upon very indifferent ground. I have gone further than I intended in a matter, in which I am but indirectly concerned, and of which I am but an indifferent judge; but your lordship has often, with great goodness, borne the imprudent officiousness of my zeal. Just as I had written thus far, your lordship's messenger brought me your very obliging letter, which gave me some insight into matters on which I was a good deal in the dark. If it were a certain thing, that a concurrence would be had among gentlemen to retire from parliament, and to take the sense of their counties upon the subject of that rash ministerial boasting, (which your lordship very judiciously takes it for granted would be used,) to be sure, your plan would revive, much more effectually than that of your friends in Yorkshire, the spirit which, for some time past, seems to have been decaying in every part of the kingdom. But the doubt is, whether the precedent languor would not have communicated itself from the county to the parliament, and to every member of it; I mean to those county members, or to most of those, who act in your system. Possibly what is done in Yorkshire may, when objected to as a partial movement, be still a method of bringing things about in a manner agreeable to your lordship's original ideas.
Lord Temple was not at the races  --  Lady Temple had been taken ill in Dorsetshire. I did not go to these races. I saw Aubrey, who very civilly came to us at our election at Wendover. He told me that Lord Temple rather thought a meeting unadvisable; but that he would take a hearty part in promoting one, provided Lord Verney and we were of a different opinion. I wished Aubrey to inform Lord Temple, that in a business of so muchdelicacy, and where such a variety of interests were concerned, no step ought to be taken from complaisance to any body, but from a full and unanimous sense of the prudence and expediency of the measure. Lord Verney agreed to this, though he is much for stirring something. I just saw Charles Lowndes at the same place, who likewise came with the same kind intentions. He is a right man, and, I make no doubt, much yours.
  I have seen but few people this summer. Among those few, were some of the courtiers. The court is fully resolved to adhere to its present system; but that if, contrary to their expectation, it should be found impossible to go on with the present instruments, they will send to Lord Chatham, not to your lordship or the Grenvilles. They are well acquainted with the difference between the Bill of Rights and your lordship's friends, and they are very insolently rejoiced at it. They respect and fear that wretched knot beyond any thing you can readily imagine, and far more than any part, or than all the other parts of the opposition. The reason is plain: there is a vast resemblance of character between them. They feel that, if they had equal spirit and industry, they would, in the same situation, act the very same part. It is their idea of a perfect opposition. Will Burke has seen Lord John Cavendish in town. His lordship is of opinion that some further explanation of the common sentiments of the party would be advisable. Perhaps it may; but I must talk a great deal to you, as well as to him, before I attempt it. It is a business of great delicacy  --  of infinite delicacy. It is not here a matter of account and calculation  --  not of a custom-house, and treasury, and counting-house; but a talk of liberty and popularity, in which nonsense will always double-distance the utmost speed of experience and reason. How well these villains deserve the gallows for their playing the courtgame against us at this season! I had a short note from the Duke of Manchester; Lord Mayor wishes to see me. I take it for granted, it is to know whether you would have any thing done in the city. I must beg some immediate advice from your lordship. The great difficulty will be, to prevent the traitors from bringing in speculative questions to supplant our business. I wish, for the moment, what I never wished before  --  that I was a freeman of London.
  I will write to Dowdeswell; and, if possible, I will be with your lordship at the time you mention. Will Burke has seen Fitzherbert, who tells him that parliament will not meet in November. Charles Fox thinks it Will Which is the best authority? I am sorry to hear of the very variable state of Lady Rockingham's health. I hope the settled autumn which seems coming on will be of service to her. Mrs. Burke is coming on tolerably in strength, considering the length and heaviness of her disorder.
  I forgot to mention that Lord Chatham has been three days at George Grenville's. He went through Wendover, on his return, the day of election. Be so good as to present Mrs. Burke's, and my humble duty, to Lady Rockingham. Believe me to be, with the greatest truth and attachment, my dear lord,
Your lordship's most affectionate and obliged humble servant,
                                                                    Edm. Burke
  

  September 23, 1770. My DEAR LORD,
I despair of being able to wait upon you this summer in Yorkshire. I believe that, just now, the attempt would be to little purpose. I take it for granted that you will be at Newmarket very shortly. If, in the interval between the meetings, your lordship should come to town, or should wish me to go to Newmarket, or to meet you at your house in Northamptonshire, the ride to the furthest of these places is not very long. I propose to set out on a tour which will carry me towards Mr. Dowdeswell's. If your lordship would have aconciliabulum, he would, I dare say, be ready to make one at your place of appointment. I saw the lord mayor a day or two ago. He seemed strongly convinced of the necessity of doing something to remove the ill impressions which were made by the unfortunate candour of one ill-timed speech. He is certainly a man of strong principle and of good natural sense, but his experience in the world is but moderate. There was a fine opportunity lost (the finest in the world) of taking the city out of the worst hands in the world, and of putting it into good ones. I suppose the Duke of Manchester has given you a full account of our first conversation, so that I shall only trouble your lordship with the substance of the last. He had not seen Lord Chatham; but he is determined to speak to him before he calls any meeting of the common council or the livery. This is certainly right; and I think he is equally right in the style in which he proposes to speak upon the subject. Though he has not seen Lord Chatham, he could easily guess by a conversation he had had with Sawbridge, how Lord C. is disposed. His lordship is earnest that something should be undertaken, but not until the proceedings in Yorkshire are known. It agrees with our idea of taking up the two points of the right of election, and the bringing evil counsellors to justice; but would have something added concerning verdicts and juries. This is, I dare say, by far the most favourite point with Lord Chatham; partly from political views, and partly from his personal animosity to Lord Mansfield. But as the gratification of this animosity and the compassing of those political purposes, are much more his affair than your lordship's, I did all in my power to possess our friend with the absolute necessity of declining to engage in any matter of law, however specious, until we should have an opportunity of consulting those of the profession who act with your lordship. I said that the matter was of so much weight, and those gentlemen of that consequence and character, that it would neither be dignified in the party, nor respectful to your law friends, to engage rashly, and without consultation, in points of such delicacy; especially as it was the characteristic of your lordship and your friends, never to take up any thing as a grievance when you did not mean in good earnest to have it reformed. He came into these ideas very fully. With regard to the instruction, he says, that he finds it objected to as a feeble and languid measure, preposterously succeeding others of infinitely greater vigour. To be sure, this is one of the obvious evil effects of the violence and precipitation, to call them by no worse names, of some of our late allies, who destroyed the series of all regular operation by beginning with the extremes. However, so the fact is; languor following this violence will be as irregular and as illtimed as the violence itself, and would be, to all appearance, as injudicious, with less excuse from fervency of spirit. The solution which he proposed was, to add to the first instruction concerning the right of election, a desire that in case the House should persevere in refusing to satisfy the electors upon that subject, their members might discontinue their attendance in parliament. Not knowing your lordship's intentions, I did not undertake to propose that measure; at the same time, as it coincided entirely with my invariable opinion, confirmed by every thing that happens, I could by no means think of opposing it. I suppose your lordship has heard that the "Society of the Bill of Rights" is hastening to its dissolution: sit illl terra levis. I say nothing, because I hear nothing certain of the cause of their violent warlike preparations ". In the midst of all this tempest the ministers, I am told, seem much at their ease; they are much out of town, and every thing goes on in a vast hurry without any method or arrangement. Why they have taken these steps, I know not; but I am strongly of opinion, that they do not portend a war, at least, unless the report be true, that a French squadron has sailed into the Archipelago. I have lately read a good part, not the whole, of a pamphlet on the late verdicts. It is called "a Letter to Almon." They give it to Lord Camden. If it be his, I think his rancour far outran his judgment. Though there are good hits in it, and some part, as I imagine, very sound doctrine, he would certainly have answered his purpose much better if he had shown less malevolence and personal enmity in the cause. Has your lordship yet seen it  I wait with impatience the result of the Yorkshire meeting. I hope my Lady Rockingham's health is restored, and that your lordship's continues. All here are well, thank God! With great truth and attachment, I am, my dear lord,
Your ever obedient and obliged friend and humble servant,
                                                                    Edm. Burke


October 21, 1770. SlR,
   I am sure you will have the goodness to excuse the trouble I am going to give you; and to which your knowledge and your communicative character must necessarily make you subject.
   When I had the pleasure of seeing you last year, I told you that I had sown about an acre of carrots for a trial. My soil is gravelly loam, tolerably deep, but, in some places, a little stiff. As the seed was sown late, the ground not very well prepared, and the year in general, I am told, not favourable to that vegetable, my crop was but indifferent. So far with regard to the husbandry of that article: with regard to the economy, the success was worse. I attempted to fatten two middle-sized bacon-hogs with carrots; after having been two months, or near the matter, in the sty, I found, that as they were young, they had grown pretty considerably, but continued as lean as when I put them up. I was obliged to have recourse to barley-meal, and in a short time they became as fat as I could wish, though, to all appearance, no way helped by the previous use of carrots.
  He is but a poor husbandman, who is discouraged by one year's ill-success, where he acts upon good authority or pursues a rational principle. Last spring, I sowed two acres with the same seed. The ground had received a year's fallow, one good trench-ploughing, and two or three turnings, in the common way; it was dunged early in the winter, so that the earth was pretty well pulverized, and the dung thoroughly rotted and mixed, by the spring. In the summer they were twice hand-hoed, I fear not sufficiently, but the crop is very large, and the carrots, though not so sightly as the sand carrots, full as rich in colour, or, indeed, rather higher and finer; a most aromatic smell, firm, and admirably tasted. I have sent two waggon-loads to London, for which I had six pounds, fifteen. The back-carriage of coal-ashes has paid my charges. I take it
   It is hardly necessary to state that this and the following letters are addressed to the celebrated author of the Farmer's Calendar, the best informed writer on agriculture of his day. Burke was himself a practical fanner, and delighted in the pursuit. He kept a considerable quantity of land in his own hands, from the time he obtained possession of his seat at Beconsfield, to the day of his death. Farming, with him, could hardly be called a relaxation; for he entered into the business with all the eagerness, and with more than the usual information, of those who practise it for a maintenance. He was seldom more intent on any subject than when discussing questions of agriculture with practical farmers in his neighbourhood, walking over their lands, and winning their respect and regard, as well by the knowledge he displayed of all the details of their profession, as by the plainness and courtesy of his address that the crop is, notwithstanding the many and heavy expenses attending it, better than a crop of wheat, according to the usual product of this part of the country. So far I am satisfied. Now comes the domestic use. Somewhat more than a fortnight ago, I put up two porkers of the Kensington breed. They have not made the smallest progress on the boiled carrots, with which they have been fed very plentifully. Last year, the bailiff attributed the failure to the carrots having been over-boiled; this year they have been boiled less; hitherto the event has been the same. The price of barley and peas is this year so high, that I should wish to persevere, if there was the least chance for succeeding; as I have a very great quantity of carrots, and the London market will take off only those which have a handsome appearance. Now, Sir, let me beg that you will be so obliging as to point out what degree of boiling the carrots ought to have, or where you may suspect that my error lies. The year is so far advanced, that I scarce dare to beg the favour of seeing you here. I have had a very uneasy summer, from a long illness of Mrs. Burke, or I should have endeavoured at that honour before. Once more I request your pardon for this trouble; and am, with great truth and esteem, Sir, Your most obliged and obedient humble servant,
                                                                   Edm. Burke.
  I am to tell you, that whilst I failed in fattening by carrots, I have this year killed one fine porker of 20 Ib. the quarter, and two of sixteen each. From barley-meal, each fattened perfectly, in little more than three weeks.
  
  
  
January 9, 177'Deaii Sir,
On finding your letter among some papers that I have been lately turning over, I am much ashamed to see that I have not answered it. I certainly owed you my best and earliest acknowledgments for the information which you gave me so fully and so readily. I hope you will add to your former civility, by excusing the rudeness, which, however, is not aggravated by a want of proper esteem for your character, or a proper gratitude for your favours.
  I am sorry I cannot give you a satisfactory answer with regard to the carrots. I cannot easily form to myself a tolerably correct idea of the profit or loss attending my experiment. A seeding trial ought to have been made with more accuracy. It is scarcely possible for me, with my numerous avocations, to get my servants to enter fully into my views upon these subjects. In the affair of the carrots, I am particularly inaccurate. Much the greater part of them were not vendible in the London market, though just as fit as the others for home purposes; all these, when the bundles intended for sale were sent to London, were brought into an outhouse, thrown into a heap, and given to the cattle and store pigs as they were wanted. This made it very difficult to ascertain their exact value. However, I am satisfied that on the whole, and after making due allowance for the extraordinary charge, I got more by them than I could have done by the best crop of wheat. I am so little discouraged, that I shall pursue that culture on a large scale next year; and shall then, perhaps, be able to give you a more minute and satisfactory account of my success. The porkers which you saw are still alive; they ate carrots while there were any for them to eat. They grew and throve, but did not fatten. I have since given them barley-meal, and they are now fit to kill, and will be large,    --    somewhere, I judge, from 80 to 100 lbs each.
  I have contracted with a seedsman in Chelsea for early white peas, of which I intend some acres. They are to be drilled. I flatter myself, that they will be off the ground time enough for turnips. At any rate they will clean some fields that want it not a little. I think, in your large work, you have given no very favourable idea of this mode of culture, at least, in some of your experiments. I intend to have about three acres of cabbage. I am much obliged to you for the seed you sent, and if you can inform me where, in London, I may be sure of having the true sort, it will much add to the obligation. I propose also to sow Indian corn, to be cut as green fodder. It is a strong succulent plant; the stalk is particularly good; and, when the grain is just formed, has a pith extremely sweet and luscious; I imagine it must be very nutritive. My horses ate some last year, and with great appearance of liking it.
  If I should have a leisure day, next spring, you may depend upon it, that I have too great a desire of improving in agriculture not to profit by your obliging invitation, and will do myself the honour of visiting you and your farm.
  I am, with great truth and regard, Sir,
Your most obedient and humble servant, 
Edm. Burke
February 1, 1771.
  My Dear Sir,
You know of the conversation between Lord Chatham and the Duke of Richmond. The great aim of that party is, that you should do nothing that is useful. This will be a trial of firmness between Mr. Dowdeswell and Lord Chatham. If you yield now, the horseman will stick to you while ever you live. If I were to presume to give my opinion, not an iota should be yielded of the principle of the bill", or the principle of the preamble.
  In the wording, to be sure, you ought to be practicable. If they choose to break with you upon this point, they mean to break if they cannot tyrannize. I should think the general consultation they propose, after you have promised your bill, is a very dangerous measure. We have few lawyers (none), they have three or four, and men of great authority. We do not want the opinion of lawyers on the propriety and justice of the measure, we may in the conduct of it; and one of their own lawyers has told us, that if a bill is necessary, ours is a good one in point of form. The character of their party is to be very ready to plunge into difficult business;  --  ours, is to go through with it.
                                                               Yours sincerely,
                                                                    Edm. Burke


                                                                  July 31,1771.
  My Dear Friend,
I am heartily affected with the subject of your last letter. I had a true honour and affection for that excellent man. I feel something like a satisfaction in the midst of my concern, which I had not in the same degree before, that I was fortunate enough to have him once under my roof before his departure. He was indeed a man of singular piety, rectitude, and virtue; and he had, along with these qualities, a natural elegance of manners, which nothing but genuine good nature, and unaffected simplicity of heart can give, and which they will give infallibly, be the exterior forms what they Will I read your enclosed letter with sentiments very different from those of disgust. How could you think I was capable of taking offence at your expressions? Men, according to their habits and professions, have a phraseology of their own, perhaps the fittest for expressing their particular feelings, or for conveying them in the most intelligible manner to those they usually converse with. As to the sentiments themselves, they are such as all good men, I trust, are perfectly agreed in; and surely it is hard if we quarrel for a difference in language, when difference in opinion ought to be far from disuniting friendships much less closely cemented by time, affection, and esteem, than ours are at this day. You make us very happy with the hopes of seeing you here;    --    can it be this summer? My wife, who has, I think, at length perfectly recovered from her long illness, will receive you with most cordial satisfaction, and I think I shall without doors, entertain you with the view of a very fine country. Our friend William, who is, indeed, truly your friend, too, will make the party as agreeable to you as he can. He felt a great tenderness at the particular affectionate manner in which you mentioned him in your letter. He is, thank God, here and well. Mr. Vansittart, and Mr. Ford, and Scraften, were the only supervisors for the company on board the unfortunate Aurora. As to poor Richard, for whom you inquire so kindly, and who, I am sure, loves you as well as I do, which is as much as any friend you have in the world,    --    he is still in the West Indies, but was well when we last heard from him. He has got a leave of absence, so that if you should come to us before the winter, you will probably find him here. He has made a considerable purchase in the West Indies. Government disputes it with him for the present; but if he prevails, as I trust he will, his establishment will be considerable, and he will be under no necessity of making a long stay in that remote and disagreeable part of the world. As to news, we have little. After a violent ferment in the nation, as remarkable a deadness and vapidity has succeeded. The court perseveres in the pursuit, and is near to the perfect accomplishment of its project; but when the work is perfected, it may be nearest to its destruction, for the principle is wrong, and the materials are rotten. Among those in opposition, there has been of late a good deal of' boulting; and some bran, to be sure, the court have got. This is not singular, and is too common to be provoking. I rather am surprised to see so many stand firm; but the firmest are those who were the least noisy, and those whom the vulgar considered as the least in earnest. But this, too, is generally the case. I am glad you know Ridge. I take him to be one of the honestest and best-natured men living, and inferior to none of his profession in ability and knowledge. I am sorry you should have occasion to put these qualities to the proof; but if you do, they will be exerted very effectually and very faithfully. My boy is at Westminster School. He has good dispositions, and is getting very forward. Mrs. Burke and Mr. W. Burke wish most affectionately to be remembered to you. Adieu, my dear friend, and believe me most truly yours,
                                                                   Edm. Burke.
Zouch desires to be remembered to you. I hope your son remembers us. I assure you we remember him with real regard, as he seems to be a very amiable and ingenuous young man.


September 10, 1771.
  Dear Sir,
I am extremely thankful to you for the valuable present which you have made to me and the public. I could have no doubt of the excellence of the work, from my knowledge of the preceding parts: but I could not make my acknowledgments for my share of the general obligation to you, until I had gone through these last volumes. I have read them with much pleasure, and, I should say, with improvement too, if a part of the merit of improvement did not rest with the learner. You have completed a work surely much wanted, a general and comparative view of agriculture as now practised in England, and have brought into one point of sight so many and so interesting particulars, that I cannot think that any mistakes (unavoidable in such a work) can materially affect its value. To say there are errors here and there, is only to say that you have undertaken a work of vast extent and intricacy. You have done me a great deal too much honour, in mentioning my feeble infantine attempts in husbandry among the labours of so many finished cultivators. My carrots, last year, were remarkably fine. I sold as much as brought fourteen pounds, and I am convinced that if I had understood Covent Garden market so well last year as I do now, I should have sold the same weight for near thirty. Those which were not fit for that market contributed to the fattening of two or three steers, and supplied my store-pigs plentifully through a considerable part of the winter. This was no contemptible advantage from two acres of ground, though cultivated at some expense. No ground on the farm answered in the same proportion. It is true that I did not find that root to answer in fattening of hogs; but it is not doing it justice to say, that the pigs showed no difference for a considerable time after their confinement. The fact is, that they grew wonderfully, and looked remarkably sleek. I had nothing to regret in the cabbage, but the want of more. Whilst this food lasted, the cows gave milk, for the season, plentifully. The butter was some of the best I ever tasted; in colour, smell, consistence, and flavour, equal to the finest May butter. The different accounts you have received in this particular were, I believe, owing to the different species of cabbage used in the experiments. It is possible that cabbages which grow into head, are of a more rank and oily quality than those which shoot into leaves. Mine were of the latter kind. Thin year I shall experience the effect of the headed sort. I have about two acres and a half under that plant. I have transplanted from the garden at different times, in order that I may have food for my cows in succession from the beginning of January, when my aftermath is consumed, to the beginning of summer, when the grass conies in again. I am afraid I rather speak too boldly, in supposing that the cabbages of so small a field will carry me through the winter, but none but the cows which are fully in milk shall have any share. The others must content themselves with straw, as you have advised very properly. Undoubtedly, cows fed with hay in winter are a dead loss in husbandry. What must be the consequence of such economy when hay is at the present price, or at a much higher, to which it will probably rise this winter? To give you some idea of the failure of grass this year, at least in this part of the country, I had the preceding summer an hundred and ten loads of hay; this last, but forty-four. My pastures have had thirteen head of cattle, and above a score of sheep, fewer than in the summer of 1770; yet those that remain are very little better kept. I do not intend to send carrots to market this year. 1 have sowed something more than the space you saw, when you did me the honour of a visit. They are, in part, sowed in the same ground. The season was unfavourable both for ploughing and hoeing; the earth was far from being well tilled, yet the crop, though inferior to that of last year, is far from contemptible in promise. I attempted about a quarter of an acre of carrots for seed; but what will appear surprising, the hares not only ate off the tops as fast as they appeared, but pulled the transplanted roots out of the ground and consumed the whole. On the spot which thus failed I have tried a new experiment. I sowed some pumpkinseed in little dunged hillocks; though I was rather late in this trial, and the season not very favourable, they have grown to a very great size, and are so numerous, that I have little doubt they would pay better than turnips, at an expense in cultivation not at all greater. My error was in setting the hillocks much too far asunder. My experiment of the cultivation of that species of the wild parsnip which they call hog-weed, did not answer. The seed was bad, and none came up. I sowed the ground, after waiting a sufficient time for the appearance of my new hopes, with buckwheat. I think you have carried a little too far the success of my experiment in the folding of ewes. I have never folded them upon my arable grounds. They have been folded only on a dry pasture, and that only until the time of their lambing approached. However, I have not the least doubt that they would bear folding very well under any circumstances. I only say I have no experience of it, further than a small folding upon pasture ground, and on that I have not found it a very great improvement. Nothing with me, improves grass ground like ashes, though I have tried a very great variety of manures. As soon as harvest is over, and you let me know at what time I may wait on you without being troublesome, I shall pay my respects to you at your farm. I am with great regard and esteem,
Dear sir, 
Your most obedient and humble servant, 
                                                                    Edm. Burke


October, 1771. Dear Sir,
I should certainly, before this, have done myself the honour of visiting your farm, and have endeavoured to profit by what I should see, and much more by what I should hear at it, but that the hourly, and hitherto constantly disappointed expectation of my brother's arrival from the West Indies has detained and still detains me at home. I don't, however, altogether despair of the pleasure of paying you my respects before the winter sets in. I have now gone minutely through your last tour, and the synopsis, with which you have so properly and judiciously closed it. Some things of moment are, 1 think, clearly and decisively ascertained; but still a cloud remains over some of the most important and interesting questions in husbandry; and you are too far removed from the unfairness of system-makers, to turn our eyes away from that cloud when you are unable to dispel it. It appears such as it is; and you have not called in the aid of fancy and opinion to supply the want of real knowledge. One of the grand points in controversy (a controversy indeed, chiefly carried on between practice and speculation) is that of deep-ploughing. In your last volume you seem, on the whole, rather against that practice, and have given several reasons for your judgment, which deserve to be very well considered. In order to know how we ought to plough, we ought to know what end it is we propose to ourselves in that operation. The first and instrumental end is to divide the soil; the last and ultimate end, so far as regards the plants, is to facilitate the pushing of the blade upwards, and the shooting of the roots in all the inferior directions. There is further proposed a more ready admission of external influences, the rain, the sun, and the air, charged with all those heterogeneous contents, which are suspended in that great universal menstruum, some, possibly all, of which, are necessary for the nourishment of the plants. By ploughing deep you answer these ends in a greater mass of the soil. This would seem in favour of deep ploughing, as nothing else than accomplishing, in a more perfect manner, those very ends for which you are induced to plough at all. But doubts here arise, only to be solved by experiment. First, is it quite certain that it is good for the ear and grain of farinaceous plants, that their roots should spread and descend into the ground to the greatest possible distances and depths?  Is there not some limit in this? We know that, in timber, what makes one part nourish, does not equally conduce to the benefit of all; and that which may be beneficial to the wood, does not equally contribute to the quantity and goodness of the fruit, and vice versa, that what increases the fruit largely, is often far from serviceable to the tree. Secondly,    --    is that looseness to great depths, supposing it useful to one of the species of plants, equally useful to all? Thirdly, though the external influences, the rain, the sun, the air, act undoubtedly a part, and a large part in vegetation, does it follow that they are equally salutary in any quantities at any depths; or that though it may be useful to diffuse one of these agents as extensively as may be in the earth, that therefore it will be equally useful to render the earth in the same degree pervious to all? It is a dangerous way of reasoning in physics, as well as morals, to conclude, because a given proportion of any thing is advantageous, that the double will be twice as good, or that it will be good at all. Neither in the one, nor the other, is it always true that two and two make four. Fourthly,    --     there are other properties in soil, besides its looseness or tenacity, which may make it dangerous to apply earth of certain properties to the plants, by deep-ploughing. The minerals, in general, seern unpropitious to vegetation; some clays seem to be of the same noxious quality, and this, if true, makes an exception to deep-ploughing upon bottoms mixed with such substances, supposing the principle of deep-ploughing to be otherwise generally sound. Under this head, comes the general objection of farmers against ploughing up the dead earth, or going beyond what is called the staple; that is, that body of dark-coloured mould, which seems to be in part formed of rotten vegetables and animal substances. All these are doubts and questions not to be passed over lightly; especially the last, because it comes from men of much experience, and is not a local objection, from the particular nature of a certain substratum, but supposes an universal inaptitude in all soils, beyond a certain depth, for the purposes of vegetation.


                                                              October 17, 1771.
  Dear Sir,
  I am much obliged to you for the kind part you have taken, onthe report of our friend Fitzherbert's conversation about the author of Junius. You have done it in a manner that is just to me, and delicate to both of us. I am indeed extremely ready to believe, that he has had no share in circulating an opinion so very injurious to me, as that I am capable of treating the character of my friends, and even my own character, with levity, in order to be able to attack that of others with the less suspicion. When I have any thing to object to persons in power, they know very well, that I use no sort of managements towards them, except those which every honest man owes to his own dignity. If I thought it necessary to bring the same charges against them into a more public discussion than that of the House of Commons, I should use exactly the same freedom, making myself, in the same manner, liable to all the consequences. You observe very rightly, that no fair man can believe me to be the author of Junius. Such a supposition might tend, indeed, to raise the estimation of my powers of writing above their just value. Not one of my friends does, upon that flattering principle, give me for the writer; and when my enemies endeavour to fix Junius upon me, it is not for the sake of giving me the credit of an able performance. My friends I have satisfied;    --    my enemies shall never have any direct satisfaction from me. The ministry, I am told, are convinced of my having written Junius, on the authority of a miserable bookseller's preface, which I have read since I saw you, in which there are not three lines of common truth or sense, and which defames me, if possible, with more falsehood and malignity, than the libellers whom they pay for that worthy purpose. This argument of theirs only serves to show how much their malice is superior to their discernment. For some years, and almost daily, they have been abusing me in the public papers; and (among other pretences for their scurrility) as being the author of the letters in question. I have never once condescended to take the least notice of their invectives, or publicly to deny the fact upon which some of them were grounded. At the same time, to you, or to any of my friends, I have been as ready as I ought to be, in disclaiming in the most precise terms, writings, that are as superior perhaps to my talents, as they are most certainly different in many essential points from my regards and my principles. I am, with the greatest truth and affection,
My dear sir, 
Your most obedient and humble servant, 
                                                                    Edm. Burke


November 9, 1771.
  My Dear Lord,
You will have the goodness to excuse this second trouble, on the disagreeable subject of our last Thursday's conversation. The discourse naturally spread out into great extent and variety, with regard both to things and persons. This may tend to embarrass the single point I had in view, and the single light in which I desire it may be considered. I spoke of the many stories I had heard; but as it is possible that their authority may be disputed, I give no great attention to them, and rather request that no sort of mention may be made of them. If your lordship should choose to speak to Lord Mansfield, I wish you would inform him, that though I perfectly despise the attempt of the court-writers to fix upon me performances to which I am a stranger, as a colour for the infamous abuse they throw upon me so systematically; yet, that I do find .myself extremely hurt in perceiving that his lordship has not thought proper to discountenance the blending a vindication of his character with the most scurrilous attacks upon mine; and that he has permitted the first regular defence that I have ever seen made for him to be addressed to me, without the least proof, presumption, or ground, for the slightest suspicion that I had any share whatsoever in that controversy.
  I am not such a child as to suffer myself to be persuaded that the writers of these papers are not in the pay of the treasury; I cannot conceive it possible that Lord Mansfield can be ignorant of the existence of such papers. I cannot believe that he does not know they are written in a style injurious to me. The public does certainly think that, being written by persons apparently zealous for his honour, they are not disagreeable to him. There is no man who can doubt that the slightest intimation from his lordship, that such a mode of defence was displeasing to him, would long since have put a stop to the impudent licence of the instruments of administration.
  It may be magnanimity in Lord Mansfield to despise attacks made upon himself; but I cannot conceive it essential to that character, for his lordship to suffer his vindication to be converted into a vehicle of scandal upon a person who has hitherto been, at least, not his enemy.
  I beg to be understood, that I do not speak as being in the least affected by the general hostility of the writers of these papers, or their employers, which I hope I have in some degree merited, and which I wish them to continue, as some sort of proof that I have not been inactive in the performance of my duty.
  I am, with the, &c.
                                                                    Edm. Burke


November 24,1771.
  Dear Sir,
I received your letter at the proper time, but delayed my answer to it until I had twice consulted my pillow. Surely, my situation is a little vexatious, and not a little singular. I am, it seems, called upon to disown the libels in which I am myself satirized as well as others. If I give no denial, things are fixed upon me which are not, on many accounts, very honourable to me. If I deny, it seems to be giving satisfaction to those to whom I owe none and intend none. In this perplexity all I can do is, to satisfy you, and to leave you to satisfy those whom you think worthy of being informed. I have, I dare say, to nine-tenths of my acquaintance, denied my being the author of Junius, or having any knowledge of the author, as often as the thing was mentioned, whether in jest or earnest, in style of disapprobation or of compliment. Perhaps I may have omitted to do so to you, in any formal manner, as not supposing you to have any suspicion of me. I now give you my word and honour that I am not the author of Junius, and that I know not the author of that paper, and I do authorize you to say so. This will, I suppose, be enough, without showing my letter, which might have the air of being written for the satisfaction of other persons than I mean to give it to. I wish the satisfaction of fair or friendly men; it would be vain to look to others. Most heartily I thank you for your friendly attention, and your good news; and am, with great truth and affection, &c.
                                       
