   November 6, 1769. My Dear Lord,
Will. Burke and I spent the best part of last week with Lord Verney, and in a manner much to our satisfaction. We paid a morning visit to Stowe, where we found Lord Temple alone. We passed about three hours in the gardens. I was prepared to find them grand and extensive, but insipid; however, it turned out otherwise. I thought many parts very interesting, and the whole as well managed as one could expect, from grounds which had been improved upon two very different ideas; and where the revolution of taste had signalized itself upon the same objects. Be they what they may, it was impossible that the gardens or gardening should engross us entirely during our walk. We had a great deal of political conversation. He was in good humour, and his manner was fair and open. Without seeming offended, the turn of his discourse indicated at times that he had heard of your lordship, and your friends, expressing a disrelish to their junto, though he did not speak out upon it so clearly, as to make me quite satisfied that this was his meaning. He said that as we had got to see one another, and to act together, he hoped there would be no retrospect, no charge, and no recrimination. That we had done each other a thousand acts of unkindness; let us make amends by a thousand acts of friendship. He was of opinion that, let what would happen, the great point for us, and the country, would be, to get rid of the present administration, which could only be effected by the appearance of union and confidence. He said, and he repeated it, that, to be sure, there was no treaty, expressed or implied, to bind the parties in honour to one another, or to any measure, except the establishment of the rights of the freeholders. In every thing else, we were both free:  --  "we were both free to play the fool as much as we pleased, mark that." He said these last words with a good deal of emphasis. Lord Chatham, he told us, was exceedingly animated against the ministry. He was uneasy that the meeting of parliament was postponed; lest a fit of the gout should intervene, though no moderate fit should keep him from the House of Peers on the first day of the session. His opinion is, that the affair of the Middlesex election should be taken up in that house, as well as the House of Commons. I can draw no certain inference from the last part of our discourse with Lord Temple, as it was rather in a matter of general speculation, than the business of the day. We talked of the court system, and their scheme of having dependent administrations. I spoke of this as the reigning evil; and particularly mentioned the favourite idea, of a king's making a separate party for himself. He said this latter did not seem so bad a thing, if Lord Bute had not spoiled it. I said I thought it was mischievous, whether Lord Bute had a hand in it or not, and equally so. He contented himself with repeating his observation, as I did by repeating mine, and we said no more upon this subject. On the whole, I was glad to find that we understood one another thoroughly, on the nature and extent of our coalition ; which once being mutually explained, will not render it necessary to say any thing upon it publicly, so as to give an advantage against us to the common enemy. I forgot to mention any thing to your lordship on the revolution in the India House. Indeed, I do not wonder that I should, the misfortunes which my friends have met with there, make it a subject on which I do not like to turn my thoughts. Sullivan has gone over to the court. When I was told this, I said to my informer, as I do to your lordship, that I could not blame him. His consequence in the India House is much more material to him than his rank in parliament; and as the whole opposition, in a manner, disclaimed and persecuted him, what tie bound him from disclaiming them, and looking for support wherever he could find it ? How he has arranged with Lord Shelburne, with whom he was generally supposed in connexion, I know not; but nobody else had any claim upon him. Neither Lord dive's conduct in the Grenville administration, nor the attachment he has chosen since, put him one bit higher with me; indeed, he has not so much to be said in his favour. As to Sir George Colebrooke, he is just what I always thought him. He has shown himself even an enemy to poor Thibot Bourke; but in the present circumstances, his conduct is natural to people of his constitution, and we must submit to it. I turn rather to a better subject, which this brings to my mind. It is Dempster's conduct on the occasion. He thought, as I do, about Sullivan's coalition. He told him that it should make no difference in his line in the India House; that there he would as firmly stand by him, as he would continue to oppose his new friends in parliament; that his political connexion was with your lordship only, and would always be so, but that if Mr. Sullivan should find that course of conduct prejudicial to his interests in Leadenhall-street, that he would, at an hour's notice, disqualify for the directorship. This was what I expected from Dempster, in an affair like this; not to sacrifice one duty to another, but to keep both if possible, if not, to put it out of his power to violate the principal.
When I got home I returned to my business, which I did not quite neglect whilst I was at Lord Verney's. I find I must either speak very broad, or weaken the matter, and render it vulgar and ineffectual. I find some difficulties as I proceed ; for what appear to me self-evident propositions, the conduct and pretences of people oblige one formally to prove; and this seems to me, and to others, a dull and needless labour. However, a good deal of it- will be soon ready, and you may dispose of it as you please. It will, I am afraid, be long. On my coming home I found, by woful experience, that one of the news-printers has got a country-house at Beconsfield. The old man that milks my cows and the old dairy-maid had married, and he has made a flaming paragraph of it. I suppose I shall be the subject of news enough, if this be the case. Hut I have sent a formal message, to beg myself off in the particular of my family here. I do not hear a word of news worth your notice. The speech I inclosed to you in my last', is to be the subject of some animadversions from Wilkes. This, I am told, is a half-secret. I am sorry, just now, that he should abuse him; for if it be well done, the ministry will triumph; if ill, Wilkes will lower himself, which will please them no less ; besides, it may be thought that h^ is encouraged by me, or some of your lordship's friends. Will. takes this to town, whither he goes to correct the sheets of Dowdeswel's pamphlet. I have, I believe, tired you; and so shall take my leave, by assuring you that I am, with the most cordial attachment, 
                                 My dear lord,
  Your ever obliged and obedient humble servant,
                                                                    Edm. Burke
  I hope the Lord Cavendishes have taken care to secure a full meeting at Derby. It will be very awkward if they should have neglected this essential step. Dowdeswell has desired me to go to Yorkshire with him on the 13th. I foresee, that if I do, this business of mine will come to nothing, so I think I must decline it, for I really think something of the sort wanting; besides, we are to present the petition on Friday se'nnight. Your lordship will be so good as to present Mrs. Burke's and my respects to Lady Rockingham.

                                                              November 14, 1769
  My Dear Lord,
I came to town, a day or two ago, in order to attend our county petition; but a violent defluxion having fallen on Lord Verney's eyes, which has sentenced him to some medical operations, we are obliged to postpone the presenting it until some day next week ; it will be Wednesday, I believe. On my way to town, I saw a person who has connexions with the Pitt family. He entertained me with an account of the present state of Lord Chatham's politics: violent, as before, against the ministry ; determined to come out on the first day of the session; fixed upon three grand points -- Corsica for foreign affairs, America for home policy, the right of election as a constitutional principle; that it was necessary that an administration should be formed in which the people might have some confidence ; that it ought to be formed upon whig principles; that the Rockinghams and Cavendishes, and such ancient whig families, who had ever been true to their principles, and consistent in their conduct, ought to take the lead in such an administration. While I was thinking on all this, I got home, and found that Lord Temple had been here, and left word that he wished to see me. When I called upon him yesterday, I found that he desired only to settle matters about the presentment of the petition. However, this matter was dispatched in a few moments, and he entered much more largely into politics. He expressed the most earnest desire of the union of all the parties into one, wished that all memory of past animosities might be worn away, and stated very strongly, and, as I since found, very truly, the hopes which the court built on the supposed impossibility of such an union. I told him that I believed no union could be formed of any effect or credit, which was not compacted upon this great principle  --  "that the king's men should be utterly destroyed as a corps,"  --  to which he assented very heartily. He seemed very solicitous that your lordship should come to town early; and laid open some particulars for a plan of opposition in the next session, so like our own general lines, that I think it unnecessary to trouble your lordship with them. At Stowe our conversation was guarded and cold; here it was otherwise, upon his part; on mine, I was nearly as reserved as before; not that I could, or did, other than express my wishes for a proper union, provided it were honourable and safe for all parties; neither did I disagree with him in opinion, that a great deal of the effect of our opposition depended upon it, as well as the formation of a proper system, whenever you should be called upon to compose it. Afterwards I saw Keppel, who has received a much more direct message from Lord Chatham than the former: the substance is nearly the same with my information, containing a strong declaration of his resolution never to act but with your lordship and your system, with many high praises of both. I shall tell you no more, because I take it for granted that Keppel will give you a distinct account of the whole.
  I cannot now send the rest of my pamphlet. It is not in order, nor quite finished even in the scheme; but I wish that, if you approve what is done, you may send it back ; for it ought not now to have a moment's delay. Many rumours of war here; but I know not well how they are founded. My hearty regards to Mr. Dowdeswell. I hope he likes the manner in which his book is printed. I shall order a parcel to be sent down and charged to your lordship, that they may be fully dispersed in the north; for I am convinced that men want arguments, to reconcile their minds to what is done, as well as motives, originally to act right. With the most real affection and attachment,
                                   My lord,
  Your ever obliged and obedient, humble servant,
                                                                   Edm. Burke.

   Decembers, 1769
  My Dear Lord,
I wait, with some impatience, the return of the papers, with your observations and corrections. If ever, they ought to appear as soon as possible. I am drawing to a conclusion, but I do not send this manuscript; partly, because it is not yet arranged to my mind; partly, because I expect soon to see your lordship in London. Your friends wish it very generally and warmly. They stand in a situation which happens, just now, to be rather awkward. Not that we are come so near a crisis, as some people imagine; very far from it, in my opinion. However, as your coming to town speedily can advance your own former determination but by a very few days, would it not be better that you were a little nearer to the centre, in order the more readily to collect your friends; and, in the mean time, to give them the tone which they ought to hold, at a time when it is not easy to say any thing which may not have a construction not pleasant to us upon the one side or the other, and when an affected silence may be as bad as an imprudent declaration? As to the Grenvilles, I am now satisfied that they have hitherto laboured, by every method, to give the world an impression that our junction is complete, and that the basis of it is their superiority in the arrangement. This appeared to me so much past all doubt, when I was in town, (from a story with which it is too long to trouble you now,) that I thought it necessary to be very explicit upon that subject, let the consequences be what they would; guarding, however, against any thing that should express any enmity towards these allies. I do by no means think that Lord Chatham goes with them as entirely as they think, or will make himself so subservient to the aggrandizement of their family, as they wish him to be. Not that I rely much on this speculation of my own, as perhaps I could not explain quite clearly the principles which lead me to it. I saw the Duke of Richmond. He is, I am sorry to say it, far from well. His opinion and affections are as they used to be; and his conversation, I believe, without the least disguise. He has so much aversion to the Grenvilles, and, unknown to himself, is biassed so much towards Conway, that I do not think his judgment so disengaged upon that point as upon any other. However, I gave him a very full detail of all that came to my knowledge since his departure; so that the whole is pretty well before him, towards forming an opinion when you come to town, and bringing him to you from Goodwood.
  I hope the Yorkshire petition is in forwardness, and will now be presented. Calcraft gave me the inclosed names, wishing that I would get some friends to forward their petition. That man's appearing in a cause, though unlucky to it, does not discredit it entirely. The only effect it has, is that which I have long seen, with infinite grief, from the coldness and dilatoriness of many of our friends in their manner of acting. Bold men take the lead to which others are entitled, and they soon come to a power not natural to them, by the remissness of those who neither know how to be effectual friends or dangerous enemies, or active champions in a good cause. They complain of the unnatural growth of such people, and they are the cause of it. When the gentlemen of the county of Kent abandoned the rights of their dependents and adherents, the freeholders of their county, it was but natural that they should abandon them, and look for protectors wherever they could find them. However, I send your lordship the list of the names, to forward this business as you think best. I hope in God this last illness does not continue. Much hangs upon your life and health. I heartily wish well to both on that account. Will you permit me to say, that I wish it from motives of a more personal regard and affection, which is very much due and very real. Present my most humble respects to Lady Rockingham, and believe me ever,
My dear lord, 
Your most attached and obedient humble servant, 
                                                                    Edm. Burke

  August 15, 1770. My Dear Shackleton,
My wife has had a very long illness; it was a slow fever, with frequent appearances of amendment and frequent relapses. She was confined to her bed for above two months, and reduced in strength and in flesh beyond any thing that can be imagined. But, I thank God, she is now up again, in good spirits, and getting forward in strength as fast as can be expected from the miserable lowness into which she was fallen. As to poor Richard, he is, I hope, by this safe in Grenada. His health was not very good, and the strength of his broken leg by no means thoroughly restored at his departure. But he was to look for no favour or indulgence from our present rulers, who even attempted to take his employment from him; but in this lesser, as in many greater instances of their malignity, they defeated their own purpose by the bungling method of the execution; and from shame they found themselves obliged to restore him to his office, but under strict orders for departure, notwithstanding the testimony of the king's surgeon concerning the state of his leg. I think we may hear from him about the end of this month or early in the next. Fie goes into a bad climate, among worthless and disagreeable people; but I hope the goodness of Providence, in his favour, is not yet exhausted. However he may partake of my own inattention in writing, I do assure you he never failed to remember you with the sincerest affection. I am glad that you find some entertainment in the "Thoughts."  They have had, in general, (I flatter myself) the approbation of the most thinking part of the people, and the courtiers admit that the hostility has not been illiberal. The party which is most displeased, is a rotten subdivision of a faction amongst ourselves, who have done us infinite mischief by the violence, rashness, and often wickedness of their measures. I mean the Bill-of-Rights people; but who have thought proper at length to do us, I hope, a service, by declaring open war upon all our connexion. Mrs. Macaulay's performance was what I expected; there are, however, none of that set who can do better; the Amazon is the greatest champion among them. Mrs. Shackleton is very stout in daring to encounter her; but she would find herself unequal, for no heroine in Billingsgate can go beyond the patriotic scolding of our republican virago. You see I have been afraid to answer her. As to our affairs, they remain as they have been ; the people, in general, dissatisfied; the government feeble, hated, and insulted : but a dread of pushing things to a dangerous extreme, while we are seeking for a remedy to distempers which all confess, brings many to the support, and most to a sort of illhumoured acquiescence, in the present court scheme of administration. As to our friends, we continue our old ground: a good harmony subsists, at least in appearance, between the capital members of opposition. Lord Chatham behaved handsomely in rejecting the idea of a triennial parliament, which the jury of London, at the instigation of the Bill-of-Rights men, thought proper to fasten upon him in order to slur us, and to get some name of consequence to patronize their madness. I suppose you have seen his answer in the papers. Indeed, the idea of short parliaments is, I confess, plausible enough; so is the idea of an election by ballot; but I believe neither will stand their ground when entered into minutely, and with a reference to actually existing circumstances. If no remedy can be found in the dispositions of capital people, in the temper, spirit, (and docility too) of the lower, and in the thorough union of both, nothing can be done by any alterations in forms. Indeed, all that wise men even aim at is to keep things from coming to the worst. Those who expect perfect reformations, either deceive or are deceived miserably. Adieu, dear Shackleton. Remember Mrs. Burke, and all of us, with much regard to your wife and your 
Most faithfully yours,
                                                                    Edm. Burke

  September 8,1770. My DEAR LORD,
Yesterday Mr. Bullock was elected, without opposition, for Wendovcr. Mr. Collins left the place early that morning without standing the poll; after having made fruitless efforts for some days before. By this feeble attempt, I hope the borough is more and more confirmed to Lord Verney; and a few common arrangements will, I trust, be sufficient to keep it so. I wish your lordship joy of another friend in parliament. The event of this election has removed no small burthen from my mind.
  I have been informed by the St. James' Chronicle, that the gentlemen of Yorkshire are determined upon a meeting. The advertisement is signed respectably. The circumstance of the sheriff's refusal to concur, seems rather fortunate. It gives an opportunity to show how strongly the sense of the weightiest people of the count, inclined against the court doctrine of election and reprobation. I make no doubt that your plan will be judiciously settled, and spiritedly pursued. If no step at all had been taken during the summer, I should be apprehensive that such a stagnation would have been little less than fatal to the cause. The people were very much and very generally touched with the question on Middlesex. They feel upon this, but upon no other ground of our opposition. We never have had, and we never shall have, a matter every way so well calculated to engage them, and if the spirit which was excited upon this occasion were suffered to flatten and evaporate, you would find it difficult to collect it again, when you might have the greatest occasion for it. Opposition is upon narrow and delicate ground, especially that part of opposition which acts with your lordship; you and your friends having exceedingly contracted the field of operation upon principles of delicacy, which will in the end be found wise, as well as honourable. However, the scantiness of the ground makes it the more necessary to cultivate it with vigour and diligence, else the rule of exiguum colito will neither be good farming, nor good politics.
I do not take the liberty of throwing out these hints, from any opinion that it is necessary to use extraordinary means to keep the spirit alive in Yorkshire, but from a strong conviction of the propriety at least of extending it to other places, and among other interests, who have hitherto acted with you in this point. People will be apt to attribute a want of communication to one of these two causes; either that the business was undertaken in Yorkshire, and carried contrary to your lordship's wishes, or that your confidence is entirely alienated from your political confederates. The former, I take it for granted, cannot be true, and if it were, cannot in policy be assigned as the ground of your reserve. The latter, when you have no complaint to make of the other parts of opposition, might be considered as a style of proceeding less fair than has been usual with your lordship, and would give them the more colourable pretence of complaint, as it is known that the first proposal for a coalition in this business came from your lordship through Mr. Dowdeswell; and however you might be supposed free to show what reserve or confidence you pleased upon other matters, they would think that they had little less than an actual right to expect communication in all steps relative to the Middlesex decision. If it should be thought proper that other parts should follow the example of Yorkshire, this communication would become the more necessary, that time and means might be furnished for proper dispositions. If your lordship should think it right to let the matter rest upon the Yorkshire proceeding, people may be desirous of knowing the grounds upon which it went so far, and yet was to be carried no further. I am informed that the idea entertained in Yorkshire is, that of an instruction to the county members. To me it appears that every objection which lay to that method last year exists, with at least equal power, in the present. I say this on a supposition that I have a right idea of the plan of the instructions. A motion to be made in parliament for censuring those who advised the king not to listen to complaints against that identical parliament itself! What arguments could be used in support of such a motion? It really appears to me with a very unparliamentary air. If indeed the members should be instructed to move a Bill for rescinding that obnoxious judgment, and providing in future for the right of election, and if such a bill should not be carried, to decline a further attendance on parliament, this would have a more practicable aspect, in the former part of it, and some appearance of spirit and energy in the latter. The other plan could only appear intended for the purpose of a day's angry debate, and that, in my humble opinion, but upon very indifferent ground. I have gone further than I intended in a matter, in which I am but indirectly concerned, and of which I am but an indifferent judge ; but your lordship has often, with great goodness, borne the imprudent officiousness of my zeal. Just as I had written thus far, your lordship's messenger brought me your very obliging letter, which gave me some insight into matters on which I was a good deal in the dark. If it were a certain thing, that a concurrence would be had among gentlemen to retire from parliament, and to take the sense of their counties upon the subject of that rash ministerial boasting, (which your lordship very judiciously takes it for granted would be used,) to be sure, your plan would revive, much more effectually than that of your friends in Yorkshire, the spirit which, for some time past, seems to have been decaying in every part of the kingdom. But the doubt is, whether the precedent languor would not have communicated itself from the county to the parliament, and to every member of it; I mean to those county members, or to most of those, who act in your system. Possibly what is done in Yorkshire may, when objected to as a partial movement, be still a method of bringing things about in a manner agreeable to your lordship's original ideas.
Lord Temple was not at the races -- Lady Temple had been taken ill in Dorsetshire. I did not go to these races. I saw Aubrey, who very civilly came to us at our election at Wendover. He told me that Lord Temple rather thought a meeting unadvisable ; but that he would take a hearty part in promoting one, provided Lord Verney and we were of a different opinion. I wished Aubrey to inform Lord Temple, that in a business of so muchdelicacy, and where such a variety of interests were concerned, no step ought to be taken from complaisance to any body, but from a full and unanimous sense of the prudence and expediency of the measure. Lord Verney agreed to this, though he is much for stirring something. I just saw Charles Lowndes at the same place, who likewise came with the same kind intentions. He is a right man, and, I make no doubt, much yours.
  I have seen but few people this summer. Among those few, were some of the courtiers. The court is fully resolved to adhere to its present system; but that if, contrary to their expectation, it should be found impossible to go on with the present instruments, they will send to Lord Chatham, not to your lordship or the Grenvilles. They are well acquainted with the difference between the Bill of Rights and your lordship's friends, and they are very insolently rejoiced at it. They respect and fear that wretched knot beyond any thing you can readily imagine, and far more than any part, or than all the other parts of the opposition. The reason is plain: there is a vast resemblance of character between them. They feel that, if they had equal spirit and industry, they would, in the same situation, act the very same part. It is their idea of a perfect opposition. Will. Burke has seen Lord John Cavendish in town. His lordship is of opinion that some further explanation of the common sentiments of the party would be advisable. Perhaps it may; but I must talk a great deal to you, as well as to him, before I attempt it. It is a business of great delicacy -- of infinite delicacy. It is not here a matter of account and calculation -- not of a custom-house, and treasury, and counting-house ; but a talk of liberty and popularity, in which nonsense will always double-distance the utmost speed of experience and reason. How well these villains deserve the gallows for their playing the courtgame against us at this season! I had a short note from the Duke of Manchester; Lord Mayor wishes to see me. I take it for granted, it is to know whether you would have any thing done in the city. I must beg some immediate advice from your lordship. The great difficulty will be, to prevent the traitors from bringing in speculative questions to supplant our business. I wish, for the moment, what I never wished before -- that I was a freeman of London.
  I will write to Dowdeswell; and, if possible, I will be with your lordship at the time you mention. Will Burke has seen Fitzherbert, who tells him that parliament will not meet in November. Charles Fox thinks it will. Which is the best authority? I am sorry to hear of the very variable state of Lady Rockingham's health. I hope the settled autumn which seems coming on will be of service to her. Mrs. Burke is coming on tolerably in strength, considering the length and heaviness of her disorder.
  I forgot to mention that Lord Chatham has been three days at George Grenville's. He went through Wendover, on his return, the day of election. Be so good as to present Mrs. Burke's, and my humble duty, to Lady Rockingham. Believe me to be, with the greatest truth and attachment, my dear lord,
Your lordship's most affectionate and obliged humble servant,
                                                                    Edm. Burke
  

