  October, 1772. My DEAR LORD,
As I trotted towards town yesterday, I turned over in my mind the subject of our last conversation. I set it in every light I could possibly place it, and after the best deliberation in my power, I came to a resolution not to accept the offer which was made to me.
  My family friends, whom I met in town, had employed their thoughts on the same subjects, and on talking the matter pretty largely, concurred in the same opinion. I shall therefore call on Sir George Colebrooke to-morrow, and give him my final answer. 
  I defer my visit to Lord Rockingham, until I am able to inform him that the business is no longer a subject of deliberation. I am, on every account, willing to believe that his silence, both to the person making the proposal and to myself, has arisen solely from a delicacy in giving advice, where a man's interest was concerned. This is your grace's opinion, and I think I have frequently observed his reserve in similar circumstances, which, where my own affections were less concerned, I have very much commended, as a conduct full of dignity and prudence. I thought, indeed, that I had been a little out of that rule. I was, in the beginning, hurt at finding myself mistaken, and my uneasiness was in proportion to the degree of love and honour I have for Lord Rockingham, and to that measure of unreserved confidence I have always observed towards him. But, as no man is a tolerable judge in his own cause, I have taught myself that the rule ought to have no exceptions, and that this reserve was merely prudential,  --  not blended with any of that neglect and coldness towards me which, if real, would, I confess it, give a deep and lasting wound to my peace of mind.
Since this delicacy does exist, I am determined, as I ought, to attend to it, and to avoid putting him under any difficulty with regard to me or my affairs. I shall say nothing of the matter until it is over, which will be by eight to-morrow morning.
  I am deeply sensible of the very affectionate manner in which your grace took part in this little consultation; and of the condescension with which you entered into my feelings, as well as of the regard you expressed to my interest and reputation. Your kindness is not thrown away upon me.
                                                                  I am, &c.
                                                                          E. B.
October 27,1772. My Dear Dowdeswell,
Since I received your letter, I have done all in my power to arrange myself for a journey to Pull Court. I find it impossible. I must therefore content myself with giving you a short, and, I fear, a very imperfect sketch of the state of affairs, so far as it has come to my knowledge. I took it for granted, that you had seen Lord Rockingham in his progress northwards, or I certainly would have written to you long before this. I know Lord Rockingham expected to meet you at Harrowden. By the turn of your letter I must presume that he was disappointed.
The East India business is the principal cause of calling parliament together before Christmas. Whether foreign politics furnish any additional reasons for this early meeting, I know not. Things both at home and abroad are in a critical situation. The East India company, without any diminution, even with a considerable increase of their trade, are not solvent. They owe eight hundred thousand pounds to the Bank. In the present state of credit this money is wanted; and the directors of this latter company would be very clamorous and troublesome, if they were not quieted by a persuasion that government would do something to enable the East India company to discharge this enormous debt, which is double the amount of the ordinary annual transaction between the two companies. In the last direction, when Mr. Purling was in the chair, the court accepted drafts from their servants in India that exceed a million. These drafts were, in their quantity, beyond all reason; and in their mode and principle, were in direct opposition to the orders which had been repeatedly given to the presidencies abroad. The drafts were chiefly for expenses incurred for building and fortifications. They ought most undoubtedly not to have been accepted, if the court of directors, or at least those in the department of treasury, had done their duty. Colebrooke values himself upon his freedom from any share in this unjustifiable acceptance, the chief cause of the difficulty that now embarrasses the company. The tea-agreement is now at its winding up, and has added some hundreds of thousands to the debt. It was certainly a most improvident bargain. The directors have had three schemes in contemplation. One, to increase their capital: a second, to borrow a million upon bonds: the third, that government this year, instead of the discharge of other debts, would pay off Pound1,200,000, of what it owes to the company. This last scheme, some of them think, with time given for the tea-composition, and a reduction of about four per cent, dividend, would enable the company to go on until a reform of their affairs abroad can be effected by means of the supervision, or by some other method. This seems to be the scheme most approved by the chairs. Others, with more resolution, and to all appearance with more sense, propose to reduce their dividend to six per cent., and thus to exonerate themselves at one stroke of the charge of four hundred thousand pounds, into which they had been tricked by the court. Then they would stand upon equal terms with administration; and as their whole chance of getting any thing would depend upon relieving the company, the company might prescribe, instead of receiving, the terms of the agreement. Take what course they will, the difficulties will be very great. You will ask what the treasury has been doing all this time. While Lord North was in the country, his correspondence with the company was amicable, and in the style of mutual accommodation. But soon after his arrival in town, his manner was extremely altered. He promised an answer to the propositions of the court of directors in a week. Three weeks are elapsed, and there is no answer. Papers are daily ordered by the treasury from the India House; and by their nature, they seem to be materials provided for an attack upon the company. In the mean time, the language of the court-runners is to the last degree hostile to that body. I am told Lord Mansfield declares publicly, that the company is unequal to the magnitude of its circumstances; that the crown ought to resume the powers of peace and war granted to them, and reduce the company to a mere trading corporation. Next to the grand object of the destruction of Wilkes, the leading object in the politics of the court is, to seize upon the East India patronage of offices. In this hopeful scheme they will be joined, in a manner, by the whole nation. Their grand difficulty is in the object itself, not in getting parliament to concur in any act of violence. To the attainment of their end, mere despotic violence is not sufficient, or they would have attained it long ago. How Lord North will appear before the House, after suffering five years to elapse, without doing any thing to enable the company to keep its agreement with government, if they were deficient in power, or to compel them if they were fraudulent, or to release them if they were not in circumstances, I cannot guess;  --   other than that he is conscious he appears before a tribunal where he is always to be acquitted, and the rest of the world always to be condemned.
I hear of nothing else with which the ministry mean to entertain their friends at the meeting. Lord Rockingham wrote lately to Keppel. He seems strongly disposed to think, that to the ministry and their friends the business ought to be left, and that we ought to be in no haste to go to the meeting. The Duke of Richmond is of that opinion; and, indeed, as far as my poor sentiments go, I concur with them most heartily. I am tired of hearing, as an answer to all argument,  --  "You want our places." The determined majority within doors, which, supporting no minister, is blindly devoted to the court,  --  the treachery of our allies in opposition, and the unsystematic conduct of many of our friends, otherwise excellent and sensible men, makes the situation of active persons on our side of the question very humiliating and vexatious. Abroad, things are not a jot better. The people have fallen into a total indiffeience to any matters of public concern. I do not suppose that there was ever any thing like this stupor in any period of our history. In this condition there is no dignity in carrying on a teasing and vexatious sort of debate, without any other effect than pelting ministers now and then, and keeping honest gentlemen from their dinners, while we make trifling and ineffectual divisions in the House, and the nation quietly acquiesces in those measures which we agitate with so much eagerness. When opposition has not some sort of correspondence with the feelings of the people at large, it only looks like personal discontent. This is the case at present; and it is very absurd in us, who sacrifice every thing to character, to give ourselves much trouble when our efforts are no longer seconded by the public sense; and when all our labour tends only to lower that character for which we have contended. If any thing can rouse the people to a sense of their situation, it is your absenting yourselves from business. To attend the House on great questions without saying any thing upon them, may not always be easy, nor even safe. It may admit disagreeable constructions. Absence from those questions will scarcely admit of more than one construction, and that the true one. This mode of absence will have a better effect than a secession, (the time for which is past,) because, as you are not bound to any thing, you may resume your attendance whenever the situation of things shall make an attendance advisable. Every thing will, however, depend in this, as in all things, upon concert. The more I consider our circumstances, and the nature of the business which the House is to be engaged in, the fonder I grow of Lord Rockingham's measure, which appears to me politic, sober, and manly; but, observe, that I am not apt to be long fond of any thing which you do not thoroughly approve. We have not often differed hitherto, and I will take care that we shall differ as little in time to come. Think of this business,  --  communicate with Lord Rockingham upon it, and let there be a settled parole for our friends by the middle of next month. You know, that if you and Lord Rockingham should, on consultation, adopt a plan of more activity,   --  why, I am ready, and will certainly follow wherever you lead me. Our principles are the same, and it is of little consequence in what manner we conduct the campaign, when we are morally sure of being defeated. All we can do is to save our honour.
Pray let me hear from you, provided you cannot let me see you pretty soon. You will now think of quitting the country. I hope you do not forget that this place is not five miles from your road. Will. Burke gives you many thanks for your obliging invitation, but bids me tell you that nothing, except its being necessary to make you chancellor of the exchequer, could prevail on him to take such a journey on horseback. Adieu! and believe me with the greatest sincerity and affection, dear Dowdeswell,
  Your most faithful friend, and obedient servant,
                                                                   Edm. Burke.
  My best compliments to the ladies. Mrs. Burke desires her respects to you.


October 29, 1772, Thursday night, half after 10.
  My Dear Lord,
I have this instant received your lordship's letter by express, and I sit down to answer it before I go to bed. In the first place, I am more happy than I can describe, in finding your health in so fair a progress towards perfect re-establishment. 1 most heartily wish that every consideration may be postponed to that object, so essential to our happiness in our society, and to all our success in public business. I have no apprehension from your lordship's absence but one. I am afraid that an opinion should gain ground among your real well-wishers, which the court has been very earnest, in spreading, that your health is so impaired as to prevent you from taking any further part in affairs. On this subject I have already received such good-natured condolences, as nothing but the tender friendship of politicians could inspire. I have been so malevolent, as to tell them a truth which deprived them of any further opportunity of showing the goodness of their hearts.
  I have had a letter from Mr. Dowdeswell, which I answered yesterday. I am greatly mortified in finding it absolutely out of my power to obey either his obliging commands or yours. I must wait your instructions here; though I should receive them much more gladly and much more usefully at Pull Court, and at Wentworth. Finding that he had missed seeing your lordship at Harrowden, I told him your ideas with regard to our conduct at the meeting, with such reasons as I thought were most prevalent with your lordship in that business. He will probably, being now fully apprised of the same thing by your own letter, communicate his sentiments to your lordship, early enough to determine you in the part we ought to take. The whole efficacy of it will depend upon its being done with a pretty general concurrence. Otherwise the attendance of some will have the air of a tacit censure on the absence of others. The Duke of Richmond entirely falls in with your lordship's plan, and has had it communicated to Lord G. Sackville. I rather suspect that he will not approve of it. Though he is not very active in the House, few are more diligent attenders. I fancy this attendance is his principal amusement; and he may not think so favourably of any scheme of policy that tends to take away that pleasure from him. Besides, he has got deep into the India committee, and does not seem totally to dislike the business that is going on there, or the general tendency of it. Few military people do. This India affair is, I conceive, to be our sole employment. The company owes two millions and upwards, which they will not be able to discharge these three years. They go to government, and your lordship will judge who is to prescribe the terms of their relief. My opinion is clear, that they are under no absolute necessity of doing so. But Colebrooke is at present in a flutter of expedients; the instrument of- the designs of other people, wholly without authority in the company; baffled in all his attempts, under imputations, all -of which he cannot remove; and without any natural resources (further than some kind of resolution) to carry him through such a labyrinth of difficulties. I offered him my assistance, which was received as offered services commonly are. It would have been, indeed, presuming in me to offer, and in him very natural to slight the proposal, if something particular in my situation just at this time, had not somewhat enabled me to be serviceable, or given me at least the chance of being so. But he was cunning. I went out of town: he was defeated both in the court of directors and in the general court. He lost every man in his list. I am sorry to see things in this state. The company, by its dispersions, and by a sort of emulation which party amongst them should make the worst choice, has played the whole game for the king's friends. Colebrooke's list certainly was very exceptionable in many parts of it, but this, which was countenanced too by a good friend of your lordship, is by far worse. Wier is certainly a man of principle, and a man of business. With good associates he would do good service; but, taking the whole mass together, he is not sufficient to leaven the whole of such a heavy piece of dough. They have not ability for the task they undertake, neither is their want of real capacity compensated by any thing imposing or authoritative from weight of public opinion that attends them. Neither Monckton nor Wier would, I dare say, consent to any job; but they have hardly power to cure the innumerable jobs that afflict all India, and distress the company here. In the mean time, the committee of the House of Commons has had one part of the effect intended, and has driven Lord Clive to the court, where he is not only protected, but rewarded. How soon Sir George will be driven by the same hounds to the same cover, I know not, but I fear every thing from that committee. How ridiculous are two or three people in their opposition to the designs of a court and the bent of a whole nation!
  I indeed feel heartily with your lordship on poor Keppel's situation. He is excessively affected, and he was the worse able to support this blow, as it fell upon him in a weak state of health. His voice is more impaired than I should expect, from the remains of a sore throat, and my fears attribute it to a deeper constitutional weakness. It is a pity he should not carry a better body about, for none ever covered a more generous, worthy, firm, and manly soul. I did not see Sir Charles Saunders when I was in town, but Will. Burke, who is now well recovered, told me he saw him walking very stoutly in the Strand.
The manner in which the ministerial aldermen have fled from the scrutiny is extraordinary. Some attribute it to their own gross stupidity. I rather suspect it to be the refinement of somebody else, and that it is meant to throw the city into such confusion as to justify a legislative alteration in their mode of election. A few days will now show. I am vexed that Trecothick voted for these shabby fellows. His known and well-grounded aversion to Wilkes and Townshend, might prevent his voting for either of them; but there was no necessity of voting for the courtiers.
  I wish earnestly to know, as soon as possible, your lordship's determination. We ought to have but one word among us. I take it for granted your lordship has already seen the Duke of Portland, Sir George Savile, and Lord J. Cavendish. They, with Montagu', are in your neighbourhood, and I believe it is not easy to find such a conciliabulum, in any one neighbourhood in the kingdom.
   They are massacring (in the true European mode of civilization) the black Carribbees of St. Vincent, without the least policy or provocation. It is the work of our cabinet, and shows how all abuses and oppressions in India will be reformed by taking the management into the hands of the crown. I am told Lord Mansfield declares, in the strongest terms, the necessity of resuming the political powers of the company. It is the tone of all the courtiers, and the nation echoes to them. Poor foolish echo!
  I have nothing more that I can think of to trouble you with. Present Mrs. Burke's and my humble duty to Lady Rockingham. I am, with the greatest affection and attachment, my dear lord,
  Your faithful friend and obedient humble servant,
                                                                   Edm. Burke.

November 7, 1772. My DEAR SlR,
I received your packet here, in town, where some business called me a few days ago, and where it still detains me. Your servant waits at Beconsfield for my answer; I could not dispatch him a moment earlier. Sir G. Savile is in town; I took your paper to him last night. His nephew, Lord Lumley, was just preparing to set out for France, and we were not able to read over what you sent with any attention until this morning about eleven o'clock; other matters unavoidably engaged me for the remainder of the day; so that it is near nine in the evening before I am able to sit down to thank you for your ample and satisfactory communication of your sentiments on the very delicate situation in which we stand, and the very important and difficult business we have before us. You do not write on the subject like one who has not been used for some time to consider it; at least, your fallow adds to your fertility; for I am of Sir G. Savile's mind, who thinks your paper one of the ablest discussions of a public matter that he has ever read. I have not time to give you the detail of our conversation; in many points he concurs heartily with you. In India politics, you know he has opinions of his own, and in consequence declines taking any active part in that business.
  I see as we proceed in the discussion of the nice and complex matter that makes the subject of your paper, that it will be absolutely impracticable to arrive at any fixed determination without a personal interview. At this time of the year, it cannot be either at Pull Court or at Wentworth. Harrowden is more central, and there Lord Rockingham might, without material inconvenience to any of them, collect the greatest part of his confidential friends. Whether you meet there, or not, it is clearly necessary that you should be both in town, in order to give weight to the final resolution you shall take, and to procure a general and timely communication to all your friends. Pressed as I am in time, forgive a hasty observation or two, on the subject of your letter. I have no leisure to send you any thing regular or digested. In the main, I have the satisfaction of going along with you, in most of your reasonings. I believe that a great deal of the difference in opinion concerning the plan of non-attendance in this session, which prevails among Lord Rockingham's friends, has arisen from our not exactly understanding one another on the extent of the measure, and themotives for proposing it. It is not suggested from choice. It is upon the idea that nothing can be attempted in parliament, with any hope of success; and that the people without doors are cold and unconcerned in the contest which is carried on between us and the ministers. If either of these fail in fact, the measure is taken up on mistaken principles. If both considerations are founded, then it is to be shown what else it is that promises better.
Without all question, if this absence should appear the result of a supine indolence and neglect of duty, it must have the worst effect imaginable upon our character. If it cannot be made expressive of the strongest and most indignant feeling and resentment, of the whole train of conduct adopted by the majority of the two Houses, it were better to continue our tiresome attendance, our fruitless debates, and our feeble divisions for six years to come, in the manner we have dragged through them for the six years that are past. But I have not yet been able to persuade myself, that your absence from parliament at the opening of the next session can pass by without making a strong impression on the public. Your character for diligence will not permit your absence to be thought the effect of inactivity; your known integrity would render every imputation of corruption ridiculous; and your number, weight, and consequence, would necessarily incite an inquiry into your reasons for a procedure so contrary to the usual tenor of your conduct. The ministry and their partisans may be depended upon for an attack on you; and this attack calling for an explanation, you will lay your reasons before the public with more grace, and probably with better effect than if they appeared previous to the step you had taken. It is always imprudent to suffer the previous public agitation of any measure that you are resolved to pursue: better take it first, and pledge your people for its subsequent justification. This is my idea of the spirit of the non-attendance proposed by Lord Rockingham and the Duke of Richmond. I concurred in it most heartily: not without a sense of the inconveniences which may attend it, but considering it as the only thing which remained for us to do. We have tried every thing else.
With regard to the extent of the plan, I never understood it to amount to a total secession; and in this particular I think I have the happiness of approaching very near to some of your ideas. The absence, I thought, would be proper on their speech and address, and upon those points which are generally considered as the measures of government, and to which we are morally certain that the House is mortgaged to the court. The attendance upon other points will mark the distinction we mean to keep in view the more strongly.
There is another point which you rather agitate (I imagine) than directly propose; that of an absolute secession, and upon some definite measure. In this matter I have some difficulties. I do not look upon such a secession, upon any proposition now probably in view, to be at all practicable, because it supposes the existence of that very spirit which we want, and which, by the proposed step, we wish to excite. Our people who now hesitate upon a limited plan of absence, will never be brought to hear of an absolute retreat. Such a secession leaves us without a power of returning with any sort of decency, let opportunities invite, or circumstances demand it, never so strongly. I should, besides, very much doubt whether any merely political question, such as the convention in Sir Robert Walpole's time, or the compromise about Falkland's Islands which happened in our own, (even supposing them the worst in their kind,) no, nor hardly any prodigal grant to the crown, can justify a secession from parliament; and though we should take that occasion to review former matters of grievance, and to make the whole an accumulated charge on the majority, certainly nothing in that mass would be much attended to, but that which was the immediate occasion of the breach; and in spite of any thing we could do to the contrary, the whole would be tried upon that single issue. Nothing can to my ideas make that formal, general, instantaneous secession proper, but some direct act which shakes a fundamental part of the constitution; and that, too, immediately and visibly. Such an act has been done, but we have, very unfortunately, I think, let pass the time for making any effectual use of it. The mode proposed seems well suited to that profession of despair, which does not arise from the resentment of a single act, but of a series of conduct of a dangerous and unconstitutional tendency. It does not seem to me to be attended with the mischievous futility of a middle measure. It has strength sufficient for its magnitude. Every thing which I say, in favour of this partial secession, is upon the presumption that the concurrence in it will be general. If this should not be the case, I very readily admit, nothing worse can be thought of. I join with you, too, in the absolute necessity of Lord Rockingham's being in town, if his health will at all admit it. I do not forget the disarray and confusion we were in upon the business of the jurybill.
You seem to think that foreign affairs make a principal part of the reasons of the court for calling us together before Christmas. As a speculation on the state of those affairs, you seem to be wellgrounded in that supposition; but I can find nothing, in the discourse of those who disperse the court-word before the opening of the session, to support it. I doubt much whether they are yet come to any thing like a resolution on that subject.
With regard to the East India difficulties, they most certainly enter largely into our business. When 1 thought of the reduction of dividend, as a means for their immediate relief, I considered it not as a compulsory measure by authority of parliament, but as an act of their own; necessary, as I conceived, for disengaging them from the ministry, and treating upon terms something more approaching to equality. But you have entirely satisfied me, that if the courtiers have a deeper and more regular design, than at this instant they profess, upon the company, the fall of stock will infinitely facilitate their project; and that this reduction of dividend will have such an effect upon the stock is indisputable. On the whole, I can scarcely conceive a more delicate part than we have to act in this business. By an unhappy and rare conjunction of circumstances, the designs of the court coincide exactly with the phrensy of the people. The greater number of those who form an opposition, naturally take the colour of their opinions from the latter; so that the management of your friends becomes a matter of, at least, as much difficulty as the opposition to the enemy. You remark very rightly on the conduct of all parties in the East India Company upon the question of last year's committee, and on their behaviour in that committee. I agree with you, that without their own vigorous and unanimous efforts in their own cause, our endeavours will be of no service. In their present situation, nothing is more certain than that they will make no such efforts. They are divided into the most rancorous factions. None of them mean, (I am persuaded,) to make a direct sacrifice of the trust they have, in so large a part, of the rights as well as the properties of the subjects; but their mutual blind passions and resentments will make them do it without intending it; and the strong distress of their affairs has so frightened the body of the proprietors for their present and future dividends, that they are the less attentive to the preservation of their privileges of a higher order. They have no leader of ability, foresight, and honesty sufficient to state to them, in their general courts, the real politics of their situation. Sir G. Colebrooke is not in our hands, nor has he ever consulted with Lord Rockingham or any of his friends, upon one step which he has taken, or which he is to take. You have heard that he offered me the first place in a supervisorship of three, with great concurrence of the whole body of direction. I did not think it then right to accept the offer; yet after such a mark of confidence, you might imagine that nothing, at least of parliamentary use, would be kept from me; but the fact is, that he has acquainted me with nothing. He is shy and reserved; and while he has complied with the requisitions of the treasury, at least as extensively as he ought, he has not communicated a single paper to me. It is true he did not refuse to send me copies of such papers as I should desire; but he showed so little willingness in the business, that I have not yet thought fit to trouble him. I will see him before you come to town, and will collect either from him or from some others, such matter as may lead us better into the detail of their affairs. Without such instruction, without better support from the company, and without a total change in the sentiments of almost all our friends, the absence from parliament, which I think proper for the whole, will be absolutely necessary with regard to us. It is impossible for me to enter at large with you into all the matters you have discussed in your very masterly paper. You have my full powers to decide for me as you please. When I see you, which I hope and request may be as soon as you can, I may learn more facts. I would say a great deal more, but I am hourly called away by the business that brought me to town. Pray urge Lord Rockingham to come to town; all depends upon it. I send you back your observations, with a note or two of Sir G. Savile's upon them. I have no copy of your paper, and lest yourself should have none, I send it back to you; but would very much wish to have a copy sent to me for the Duke of Richmond's use, and the satisfaction of some other friends. To conclude, let me again and again entreat that we may not be left at the opening of the session without a leader, or the least idea of a plan of conduct. The time gives you very little leisure for deliberation.
  I am, my dear sir,
                                                         Ever faithfully yours,
                                                                    Edm. Burke


November 11, 1772. My Dear Lord,
By this time you have received the whole of Mr. Dowdeswell's thoughts and correspondence, on the subject of your lordship's proposition. I confess, on the very first suggestion, I entered into it with great good liking: but one condition always attended my approbation; that is, the unanimous, cheerful, and zealous concurrence of all your lordship's friends. If the plan were by them unanimously adopted, manfully avowed, and resolutely adhered to, I do not entertain the slightest doubt that it would come up to the most sanguine expectations. But I find so little concurrence, that it seems to me the last degree of imprudence, in such a diversity of opinion, to hazard a measure, the whole effect of which depends upon unanimity. I thought it a mark of confidence that was proper, to show your lordship's letter to Lord Gr. Germain. He argued much, and truly not without cogency, upon the subject. He looked upon a concurrence even of your lordship's particular friends, in any plan of non-attendance, as a thing absolutely impracticable. He did not think that we are strong enough, either in numbers or popularity; or that there is enough of discontent among the people without doors to give the measure any sort of effect. He apprehends that we might rather run the risk of being forgotten by the public, than of exciting in them the spirit that we wish to raise. Besides that, there are so many other persons in opposition, not only unconnected, but extremely adverse, who would not fail to take advantage of our secession (however qualified) to succeed to our situations, and to accuse us of having meanly relinquished them, that we can never propose it with any hope either of credit or advantage. He was very sure, that neither of the Townshends, the father or the son, would enter into it; as contrary to the opinions of both, and to all the feelings of the younger and more active of the two. I told him that your lord ship (as he might, indeed, see by your letter) entertained the idea only as a matter to be considered. The fact is, Mr. Dowdeswell's idea of absence does not go to above a fortnight. Sir G. Savile is very doubtful; Sir Charles Saunders and Lord F. Cavendish disapprove. Your lordship's northern friends are generally adverse, and none of them earnest for it; so that the proposition, as far as the sense of your lordship's friends can be collected, is, upon the whole, disliked. Lord George Germain seems rather to approve of our course during the last session, where we lay by until fair opportunity of opposition offered; but that our attendance, though inactive, ought to be regular, in order to show that, though we may be silent, we are nevertheless vigilant. I am persuaded that we cannot follow any plan of this kind in the approaching session. They will, because they must, lay something immediately before us, and we must immediately take our part in it. But nothing can be done without your lordship's early appearance in town, ten days at least before the meeting. This wish and opinion of mine is always in subordination to the care of your lordship's health, which is, and ought to be, our first consideration.
The ministers, I believe, have nothing very precisely determined with relation to Indian affairs. I am told, and I do not think it wholly improbable from many circumstances, that Lord North was against our meeting before Christmas, but that Lord Mansfield urged on the early summons. Notwithstanding Lord North's procrastinating disposition, he must do something with regard to the company's insolvency. He must, I think, accept of one, or other, of their propositions. Mr. Dowdeswell inclines to the scheme of the company's receiving the debt from government, as the most eligible measure, and is, by all means, for keeping up the dividend. His reasons are certainly cogent, but, as yet, we have the matter very imperfectly before us.
  I saw a letter to Sir Charles Saunders from Sir Charles Knowles. He speaks of the conclusion of peace between Turkey and Russia as almost certain, and this will probably draw with it some sort of pacification of Poland, and may thereby ensure the continuance of peace in the rest of Europe, for some time longer. I cannot find that foreign affairs are intended to form any part of our business at the meeting. If your lordship gives me notice when you will be at Harrowden, I shall be glad to wait upon you there, but, indeed, I had much rather meet you in London. I am, with my best respects to Lady Rockingham,
    My dear lord, ever your lordship's most 
obliged and obedient humble servant, 
                                                                     EDM. BURKE
  I hear that Charles Fox's speedy coming into the treasury is expected. This event would not, 1 hope, prove sinister to a very just claim; and would prevent much oppression to individuals, and, I am quite certain, a very considerable loss to the public.


November 17, 1772.
  My Dear Loan,
I am much obliged to your grace for your very kind letter of the 15th, which I received by the machine. Whatever others might have imagined, I never thought your grace too tenacious of your opinions. If you had rather leaned to that extreme, I should not have esteemed you the less for it. I have seen so many woful examples of the effect of levity, both that which arises from temper and that which is owing to interest, that a small degree of obstinacy is a quality not very odious in my eyes, whether it be complexional, or from principle. When a man makes great sacrifices to his honest opinion, it is no wonder that he should grow fond of it. I am sure that nothing can hinder public spirit from being very suspicious, except great consistency. Those who do not much admire the security itself, nor perhaps the virtue it secures, will represent it as a mask, and perhaps the virtue as an obstinate and intractable disposition. Those who think in that manner of your grace, form that opinion on your steady attachment to your principles. They know nothing of your compliance and practicability, in carrying on business among your friends. I can bear witness that it has always been full as much as was necessary towards keeping a great system well compacted together in all its parts. I have known some good effects of that practicability. I agree, too, that there have been instances where we may now have reason to wish you had less facility. After all, every political question that I have ever known, has had so much of the pro and con in it, that nothing but the success could decide which proposition ought to have been adopted. People in a constant minority can have no success, and therefore, have not even that uncertain way of solving any problem of political conduct. I believe we have had more divisions among ourselves than we ought to have had, and have made many mistakes in our conduct, both as a body and as individuals. Comparing our proceedings with any abstract standard, we have been very faulty and imperfect; but if you try yourselves by a comparison with any other existing body of men, I believe you will find a more decent, regular, consistent, and prudent series of proceeding among yourselves, than among any of them, or all of them put together. Have you in any place where you have had an interest undone yourselves so completely, as a certain party which was lately in possession of the corporation of London? a set of gentlemen who cannot plead innocence and simplicity as an excuse for their innumerable blunders. In the House of Lords, have the chiefs of you ever framed such injudicious motions, paid so little attention to your mutual honour, or contrived to reconcile your proceedings at one time to your declarations at another, with so little finesse and dexterity as some persons of very high name in this country? You have not, like them, while they were miserably distracted among themselves, formed a thousand childish and mischievous plots, to break to pieces the only people who could possibly serve them, and in whom, if they had common sense, they would, for their own sakes, have placed great confidence, as well as have endeavoured to acquire the like from them, by every method of fair and conciliatory conduct. If you turn from them to the factions that make what is called administration, surely you are guiltless of that tissue of absurdities by which government, that by mere abuses can hardly be more than odious, has been rendered the most contemptible thing in the world. Look at home,  --  one has much to complain of. Look abroad,  --  one has ten times more. So that on the whole, I am inclined to think that the faults in your body are no more than the ordinary frailties of human nature; some of them, too. inseparably attached to the cause of all your strength and reputation. You are, in general, somewhat languid, scrupulous, and unsystematic; but men of high birth and great property are rarely as enterprising as others, and for reasons that are very natural. Men of integrity are curious, sometimes too curious, in the choice of means; and great bodies can seldom be brought to system and discipline, except by instruments that, while you are out of government, you have not in your power. However, with all these faults, it is better you should be rich, and honest, and numerous, than needy and profligate, and composed of a few desperate politicians; though they have advantages in their own way, which you must always want. It is with such reflections I compose and comfort myself, in the occasional dejections and vexations that I am subject to like other men, and which your grace has seen but too much of; and they will in my cool moments always put me at ease, and reconcile me to every thing you do, as long as I can act in public, whether I agree in opinion with the rest of you, or not.
As to your grace's situation in the party and in the world, it would be the greatest injustice to Lord Rockingham, not to say that he sees and feels his obligations to you in their full extent, and has often spoke, as he ought, of the unparalleled part you have acted. His nearest and oldest friends are, much in the same degree, your own. There can be but one opinion on your conduct and abilities. With regard to others, your grace is very sensible that you have not made your court to the world, by forming yourself to a flattering exterior; but you put me in mind of Mr. Wilkes's observation when he makes love, that he will engage in such a pursuit against the handsomest fellow in England, and only desires a month's start of his rival on account of his face. Your month is past; and if your grace does not, every one else does remark, how much you grow on the public, by the exertion of real talent and substantial virtue. You know you have already some fruits of them, and you will gather in such fruits every day, until your barns are full as they can hold. One thing, and but one, I see against it, which is, that your grace dissipates your mind into too great a variety of minute pursuits, all of which, from the natural vehemence of your temper, you follow with almost equal passion. It is wise, indeed, considering the many positive vexations, and the innumerable bitter disappointments of pleasure in the world, to have as many resources of satisfaction as possible within one's power. Whenever we concentre the mind on one sole object, that object and life itself must go together. But though it is right to have reserves of employment, still some one object must be kept principal; greatly and eminently so; and the other masses and figures must preserve their due subordination, to make out the grand composition of an important life. Upon these sound principles, which your grace would require in some of those arts that you protect, your public business, with all its discouragements and mortifications, ought to be so much the principal figure with you, that the rest, in comparison of it, should be next to nothing; and even in that principal figure of public life, it will be necessary to avoid the exquisiteness of an over-attention to small parts, and to over-precision, and to a spirit of detail, which acute understandings, and which, without great care, all precise reasoners are apt to get into; and which gives, in some degree, a sort of hardness, and what you connoisseurs call the dry manner, to all our actions. Your grace has abundant reason not to be discouraged from the great exhibition that I wish to see you chiefly intent upon. In the course of public business, by degrees, your grace developes your true character. You would be in a bad condition, if, with the doors shut after the manner of the French, but on the principle of the English constitution, you were to be tried only by your peers. But this is not so; business, by degrees, brings various kinds and descriptions of men into contact with you; and they all go off with the best impressions, and communicate them to the world. Why have I rambled thus far? Why, truly, because it became an amusement to my mind; and that I see your grace wants some amusement too. But is the indulgence of a loquacious vein any amusement? I will try by going on further. I agree with your grace, that our condition is very bad. It is certainly so. It can be concealed, neither from friends nor enemies. The time for secession is past, and no other such opportunity is in prospect. It would have done, 1 am persuaded; but none of our friends are to blame for this rejection of that idea. On the first proposal, Lord Temple, Lord Lyttleton, and Lord Camden showed such invincible repugnance to it, that in your then situation it could not be thought of; and it was impossible at that time to take a separate walk from them. With regard to the transaction of 1767, I do recollect that I, as well as others, did, in some particulars, differ from your grace's opinion. I think you will do me the justice to believe, that it was not out of any particular regard to Bedford House. Indeed, independently of my former observations, I saw clearly, during the supper at Lord Rockingham's, the most unamiable dispositions; a behaviour in some of them that was scarcely polite; and a reserve, which wine, circulated briskly until the sunbeams drove us from it, was not able to dispel. though these people are not indeed candid, but naturally very loose and careless talkers. But I thought I saw too, that the whole treaty, on the part of the Duke of Grafton and Lord Camden. and much more another, was merely an imposition both on you and on Conway;  --  principally meant to bring the latter to act the part he did afterwards; and I can scarcely forbear being still of opinion, they never meant to bring you in, except on terms that, when they became explicit, you could neither have accepted nor rejected, without great detriment and disgrace to you. I conclude this, not only from the closet disavowal in the middle of your proceedings, but from a conversation with General Conway, a few days after all was broke off, in which he very frankly told me, that the intention never was to bring in the whole even of your body, but about half a dozen (I think) of the principal people; and to let you make way for the rest as opportunities should offer. Constituted as the remaining part of the ministry was, this was a novel plan of power which would enable you to serve your cause. Your grace, I dare say, recollects that we did all, in effect and substance, at last, accede to your grace's opinion; when, after a long consultation, protracted to near two o'clock in the morning, and after frequent messages backward and forward, your grace at length carried the ultimatum to General Conway, and never received an answer from that day to this. On the whole, I saw so little real intention towards you at that time, either in the Duke of Grafton, or Lord Camden, or General Conway, or in the first mover, that I cannot, without great difficulty, attribute our present condition to our rejection of the proposals of the court; for, in effect, if they had been such as your grace thought them, the treaty never could have broken off on account of Bedford House, which had broken with you, and that in a manner equally insolent and scandalous, before that business concluded. Your grace remembers well the character of the Duke of Newcastle, who always treated with his enemies, in beginning by putting himself into their power, and by offering more than they would think of asking; and whose jealousy, little short of phrensy, of Lord Rockingham, about objects which he neither would nor could have held, drove him headlong into any snare his adversaries laid for him. Lord Albemarle, too, had his attention to the Duke of Bedford; but I must say with as great, as just suspicions of him and his, as with attachment to you, on the total. Yet it was very necessary to look to both these persons; and they, at least one of them, and the most material, required nothing more than an empty compliment; and this the court knew, or might have known, as well as we did. But whether I am mistaken or not, the thing being passed, it only gives pain to attribute our misfortunes to our faults, where circumstances will not suffer our repentance to amend them. Bad they are indeed! but where things are desperate with regard to power, they are not always in a situation the most unfavourable to character. Decorum, firmness, consistency, courage, patient, manly perseverance,  --  these are the virtues of despair. They are worth something, surely; and none has profited so much of that situation as your grace, nor could you have shown of what materials you are made in any other. Persons in your station of life ought to have long views. You people of great families and hereditary trusts and fortunes, are not like such as I am, who, whatever we may be, by the rapidity of our growth, and even by the fruit we bear, and flatter ourselves that, while we creep on the ground, we belly into melons that are exquisite for size and flavour, yet still are but annual plants, that perish with our season, and leave no sort of traces behind us. You, if you are what you ought to be, are in my eye the great oaks that shade a country, and perpetuate your benefits from generation to generation. The immediate power of a Duke of Richmond, or a Marquis of Rockingham, is not so much of moment; but if their conduct and example hand down their principles to their successors, then their houses become the public repositories and offices of record for the constitution; not like the Tower, or Rolls-chapel, where it is searched for and sometimes in vain, in rotten parchments under dripping and perishing walls, but in full vigour, and acting with vital energy and power, in the character of the leading men and natural interests of the country. It has been remarked that there were two eminent families at Rome, that for several ages were distinguished uniformly by opposite characters and principles, the Claudian and Valerian. The former were high and haughty, but public-spirited, firm, and active, and attached to the aristocracy. The latter were popular in their tempers, manners, and principles. So far the remark:  --  but I add that any one, who looks attentively to their history, will see that the balance of that famous constitution was kept up for some ages, by the personal characters, dispositions, and traditionary politics of certain families, as much as by any thing in the laws and orders of the state; so that I do not look upon your time or lives lost, if, in this sliding away from the genuine spirit of the country, certain parties, if possible, if not the heads of certain families, should make it their business, by the whole course of their lives, principally by their example, to mould into the very vital stamina of their descendants, those principles which ought to be transmitted pure and unmixed to posterity. Neither Lord Rockingham nor your grace have children: however, you do not want successors of your blood; nor, I trust, heirs of your qualities and your virtues, and of the power which sooner or later will be derived from them. This I say to comfort myself, and possibly your grace, in the present melancholy view of our affairs. "Although the field is lost all is not lost," to give you a line of your Milton, who has somewhat reconciled you to poetry,  --  and he is an able advocate. For the rest, I can only tell your grace, that * *


Nov. 19, 1772. My DEAR LORD,
I cannot attribute the opening of my letter to mere curiosity, except it were the interested curiosity of some base politician. I should think the villain might be traced, and in some way or other, the principal or the instrumental delinquent punished. A few days before I had received your lordship's by Mr. Thesiger, I wrote pretty largely by the same conveyance, on the subject of my conversation at Pall Mall, and on the opinions of such other friends as I could collect. They were, on the whole, adverse to the idea I suggested to them. As I have stated this matter so much at large, and as your lordship has received Mr. Dowdeswell's long and able letter, it is not necessary to say more by this unconfidential conveyance.
  I am somewhat anxious about your lordship's presence at the meeting. This wish is always in subordination to the demands of your health. But as I hope you have not lately gone backward, I incline to flatter myself that a journey hither would do you more good than harm. It would free us from a great awkwardness of situation. If this meets your lordship at Wentworth, it will be rather late for my purpose, which I might indeed have considered, when I sat down to write. If however, unluckily, I have not blundered so much as I hope I have, I have just to mention to your lordship that the East India Company had yesterday received a message from the treasury, the report of whose contents immediately sunk the stock, I was told, seven per cent.: as the message, which desired to know what plans for their relief the company had to lay before parliament, conveyed in the end very strongly, an implication that they would not be permitted to make any dividend. This is all the news I hear. My respectful compliments to Lady Rockingham; and believe me, with the greatest truth and affection,
                                 My dear lord,
Your lordship's most obedient, and obliged humble servant,
                                                                   Edm. Bukke.
  
  
November 23, 1772. My Dear Lord,
I came hither this day, in order to settle some little affairs, having been rather disagreeably detained in town for about a fortnight. A few hours after my arrival your lordship's messenger brought me your most obliging letter of the 20th. I am pleased that you have taken your final resolution of spending your holidays at Wentworth. As the session approaches, I see the probability of a full attendance of your friends almost vanish. Mr. Dowdeswell will not be in town at the meeting. I think it rather likely that the Duke of Richmond will continue in the country. On the whole, I am satisfied that your presence in London, with danger to your health, would hurt us all much more, both in our feelings and our interests, than a temporary absence which may tend to give us a longer, a more effectual. and a more satisfactory use of your counsel and assistance. We will do the best we can, that is, we will do as little as we can. For, in truth, what is there left for us to do? In the present state of the popular opinions, of the designs of the court, of the distractions of the company, what can one or two effect, utterly unsupported, if not directly thwarted, by nine-tenths of those who upon common occasions are the only friends we have to rely upon? This is our state, and we must submit to it.
Your lordship sees I confine my present consideration entirely to the affairs of the East India Company, because I am persuaded that, for the present, ministry does not mean to bring any other before us. Sir George Colebrooke has at last lent me, for a day or two, copies of the papers which have been demanded by the treasury. I have looked them over as carefully as the time would admit. I am more convinced than ever of the very flourishing state of their affairs, and that their present embarrassment is not from a defect of substance, but merely from a difficulty with regard to cash. Into this difficulty they never could have fallen by the mismanagements of their servants abroad; though these have been, I make no doubt, very considerable and very culpable. It is the rapine of parliament, covered under the name of two agreements; one for revenues in India, which never have existed, as a matter of profit, to either of the claimants; another for a speculation upon teas, which had no foundation, and which it is downright extortion in the government to exact, that has given theirs and public credit such a shock. In all the conversations I have had both with Colebrooke and with a person of very opposite character and designs (Mr. Gregory), I have no kind of doubt with myself that a million might and ought to be borrowed, and that there will then be sufficient fund for payment of interest at five per cent., leaving also an ample provision for sinking the principal, provided parliament can prevail upon itself to give up a claim, which, while it has an existence, will never suffer the company or the nation to enjoy a moment's quiet or security. If this loan were authorized by parliament, and the senseless claims abandoned, the proprietors could, with great safety to their capital, divide twelve and a half per cent., and continue to do so, while events suffer their trade to continue in its present situation. It is true, I was originally of another opinion; but a view of the papers, which have been demanded for purposes wholly adverse to the company, and the most serious consideration of the affair, have made me alter my sentiments. If I do not misapprehend Mr. Dowdeswell, who first gave my mind this turn, he does not object to the reduction of dividend, as supposing it a coercive measure of government, but as a step dangerous to the rights of the company, though taken by themselves; for by this measure the stock, already very low, will fall to the ground; and government, under pretence of a composition or purchase, may with the greatest facility, and without any appearance of arbitrary power, take into their own hands the charter, and, with it, all the rights and possessions of the company. It was the high dividend and high price of stock in 1767, that rescued the company out of their clutches. I would not have your lordship mistake me so far, as to think I would represent the keeping up the dividend at twelve and a half per cent., as a measure that, in the present disposition of ministry, I conceive to be at all practicable. I only speak of it as what I seriously think appears, on the face of the papers, to be the only means of supporting public credit on a proper foundation; and of keeping the company out of the hands of any court projector, who may think of decorating the crown with the collected spoils of the East. The proprietors, however, who see no other way of getting rid of the incumbrance of the Pound400,000, are, I think, in general prepared to acquiesce in the reduction to six per cent. The court, I believe, have for the present given up all sort of hope of receiving that sum; and, therefore, have rejected the first, and I really think the only propositions, that can be made for the relief of the company in the present exigency. They are so far from meaning, therefore, to keep up a forced dividend, either to themselves or to the proprietors, by improper borrowing, that I am apprehensive they have fallen into the very opposite extreme. They seem resolved to admit of no dividend whatsoever. Lord North sent a treasury letter to the court of directors, calling on them to lay before him their ideas of a method of relief, and concluded with desiring to know " upon what foundation they intended to declare any dividend." This message came during some sales; and the purport of it having been spread about, I hear caused a fall of seven per cent, in the price of stock. If this wicked project should be carried into execution, it is easy to see that there is an end of the company; and a beginning of such a scene of frauds, impositions, and treasury jobbing of all sorts, both here and in India, as will soon destroy all the little honesty and public spirit we have left.
  I am not governed in my present opinions by any idea of our being tied down to a servile adherence to the maxims which we supported in 1767; since it is obvious, that, when we have no interest one way or other in the point, we might be allowed, without any suspicion of deserting our principles, to alter an opinion upon six years' experience, if six years' experience had given us reason to change it. But the fact is. that we never denied,  --  on the contrary, we always urged it to be the province and duty of parliament to superintend the affairs of this company, as well as every other matter of public concern; but we considered it as a very different business to enter a house in order to regulate it, from breaking in in order to rob it. We considered it as the duty of parliament to see that the company did not abuse its charter privileges, or misgovern its Asiatic possessions; but we thought it abominable to declare their dividends in the House of Commons, and to seize their revenues into the hands of the crown. These, I am sure, were our opinions then, and I see no sort of reason for altering them since that time.
  On foreign politics, I shall not trouble your lordship, until I hear something more of facts. I do not hear that they intend to engage us that way, at least not directly, on the meeting. Nor does the reduction of the seamen to 20,000, nor the ministerial attempts on the company, look like an intention of making war.
  I am infinitely obliged to Lady Rockingham for her ladyship's intention of honouring me with a letter. Nobody can be more sensible of her ladyship's goodness and condescension, or more willing to obey her commands.
  I will-detain your messenger no longer; I have, indeed, little to say, but what I never say but with the greatest truth, that I am,
    My dear lord, 
Your affectionate and obliged humble servant, 
                                                                      E. Burke
  On casting my eye over what I have written, I find I have expressed myself equivocally in one part. It might seem as if Sir George Colebrooke and Mr. Gregory had approved my ideas of borrowing, dividend, &c. This I do not know. I only mean to say that after conversing with them abundantly on the subject of the papers, &c., I am exceedingly confirmed in my opinion of what would be best to do, if I had in my choice what ought to be done.

  


  

