  1771. My Lord,
When your lordship is pleased so severely to censure almost every part of my conduct and character, I should be without all comfort if my conscience did not as clearly acquit, as you have decisively condemned me.
  I assure you, I wish to stand well in your opinion, and do not, even now, easily reconcile myself to the loss of it. I will, therefore, my lord, first endeavour to clear myself of that great and prolific fault, the source of so many others, with which your lordship charges me,    --    the "not bearing to receive instruction from my friends, and not being able to distinguish admonition fromreproach"
  My lord, when your lordship informs me, (using what you tell me is the " language of the world," and adopting that supposed language,) " that such arrogance in a man of my condition is intolerable;" your phrase does, to my poor understanding, imply some contempt of my condition, and a very ill opinion of my temper and character; and therefore, might pass with a man professing no better than mere human feelings, as reviling rather than advice. I say nothing of the term of "ridiculous folly," and that suppressed epithet which is so very easily supplied, and can be supplied by none but a very offensive term.
These, my lord, and some other expressions, together with a general sweeping censure of my whole conduct, might well make me consider your lordship's letter as designed to mortify, not to instruct me. The former effect, whether you intended it or not, it did most perfectly accomplish.
You think I ought to show myself more of a philosopher in bearing such treatment. It is certain I have endeavoured, all my life, to train my understanding and my temper in the studies and habits of philosophy. In some few things, I fancy I am grown almost a stoic; but your lordship's unkindness has attacked me on a side on which I was absolutely unguarded, and I bear it like a girl.
  If I do not act a proper part in life, it is not, as your lordship is resolved to suppose, for want of sufficient admonition. If my enemies had been silent, (your lordship knows they are not,) there are those of another description near me, who behold my faults with all the anxious sensibility of real affection. They are not more disinterested friends and sanguine advocates, than they are strict and faithful monitors, that keep watch on every action of my life. Such are those very persons whose warmth your lordship supposes to scare away truth from approaching me. Let those who see them and me together, judge between your lordship and them. Hut passing them by, whenever your lordship did me the honour of your advice, if I was not always prudent enough to profit of it, be so good as to recollect what expression of heat from me attended the occasion, or what distant and unfriendly coldness followed it. Till the moment of your letter, do you remember a single angry word that ever passed between us?
Your lordship has fixed a period for your ceasing to exercise that part of the office of friend which consists in counsel. Pardon me, my lord, your goodness has been much more extensive than you imagine it. I could put you in mind of another obliging interposition of your advice, a good while after that period, and on a point, too, of public conduct; I mean the advice you gave me in relation to the payment of the civil-list debts. It is true, I was of an opinion different from that of your lordship, and acted upon my own; but you must know that, very soon after, (as soon, indeed, as I could see you,) we were apparently, as we ought to have been, on the very best terms that can be imagined.
Your lordship, looking about for my faults with more solicitude than I deserve to be honoured with, rests in particular upon my having been formerly " hurt at your advice, to bring down the aim of my ambition to a lower level, and not to look at an office," to which, it seems, at one time I had aspired. I don't recollect the conversation; very possibly your lordship did give me some such advice. Presently I will speak to the matter of it; but you will think, I dare say, on comparing facts and circumstances, that I could hardly have been seriously angry with you on that occasion; for if I was not angry with those who gave me neither that office nor any other office, but if, on the contrary, I have adhered to them with the most zealous and affectionate steadiness, in all their fortunes, is it to be conceived that I could show any real resentment to your lordship,  --  my close and confidential friend,  --  only for advising me not to look upon only one of those objects, none of which I could obtain from my ministerial friends? No,  --  my lord;  --  the thing is impossible; your memory must have failed you. But if your lordship would persuade any body that my feelings on that occasion could bear a resemblance to those which tear my heart to pieces on this,  --  here are your two letters;  --  and if this were your usual style of admonition, will mankind be astonished if I always felt it on the naked nerve, and with the quickest and sorest sensibility? But it was not;  --  it was far from it. You never said such things, and I never had feelings, in any sort, like my present. Yet even now, with such letters on my table, am I irritated to any improper rudeness, or do I go an inch beyond the immediate matter of my grievance?
  I know not what is contained in private cabinets, but I have never seen published in any collection, in any age, one resembling those which I have received from your lordship, except one which was written as a letter of consolation from Sir Francis Bacon to Lord Chief Justice Coke, upon the latter's falling under the displeasure of the court. This consolatory epistle does almost come up to the asperity of your lordship's late letters to me.
  So far as to my impatience of admonition: now, as to the conversation relative to Lord Mansfield. I must beg you, my lord, not to suppose me capable of that "jejune, puerile, inconclusive, disjointed reasoning" you attribute to me. fie so obliging as to distinguish in my conversation with you at Kew-green, the two most different things in the world; the reports which I related as the first causes of my uneasiness, from the matter I wished you to touch in your discourse with Lord M. as what appeared to me irrefragable presumption, equal to proof, that his lordship did not discourage these attacks upon me. It is very true, that your lordship did not think I had any ground to be displeased with Lord M., and you did frequently divert the argument from the presumption I mentioned as my ground for complaint, to the town-talk which I related to you merely as matter of conversation. On that account, and on that only, and to prevent that confusion of distinct matters into which (whatever I could do) I saw you inclined to run, I wrote your lordship the letter you mention, and which you do not condemn. But, under favour, what I asserted of your lordship's not having shown any disapprobation whatsoever of the style and temper of my message, which afterwards raised such a storm, is strictly true. Your lordship does not dispute this fact; it made the whole of my assertion, and your letter demonstrates the truth of it. As to the particular communication or message, I really think it more agreeable to the statement given in my last letter, than to that mode in which your lordship recollects it; but this being a matter of memory, your lordship is at liberty to take it even in your own way. Let it stand in the broad glare of light into which you have put it, and I can hardly think that Lord M. himself (the very party concerned) could hold it so shocking an offence, that, considering myself (though at a very respectful distance) his friend, I thought it not right in him to suffer me to be abused in a manner beyond all example, as the author of libels upon him, when I was sure he might have prevented it; and that he ought not to be surprised if I acted no longer in that character. My situation was ridiculously vexatious; publicly abused on one side for the civil things I did say of him, and on the other, tore to pieces for attacks which I never made upon him.
  I hope I am not mistaken; but I would not put to the account of civility to Lord Mansfield any thing that ought not fairly to be entered to that article. In my parliamentary vote, I never have consulted any thing but the intrinsic merits of the measure itself, or its extrinsic tendency to do good or evil upon the whole. For this, he is no ways obliged to me, but I have more than once gone beyond the necessity of my argument to speak as handsome things of him, as the extent of my very limited powers would allow. My kinsman, Mr. William Burke, has done the same.
  If Lord Mansfield (I do not know that he is) be exalted on one side, in such transcendent stateliness as utterly to disregard my civilities, I hope his dignity is evenly and equitably balanced; and that on the other side, he could not violently resent the threat (as your lordship calls it) of discontinuing those civilities on which he sets so slight a value. This is but the equality essential to a great character. But if he be as wise a man as I think him, and such a lover of fame as he declares himself to be, he will not agree with your lordship in imagining the public testimony of an honest man, (not of the less value if that man should take totally a different line of politics,) to be so "very contemptible in the possession, or so very ridiculous in the loss;" nor will he consider it as so "horribly unnatural" in any man who thinks that his voluntary and disinterested civilities have been met with injurious returns, if he, in his anger, should "threaten to withhold them " in future. Few persons are altogether so stately, and I trust your lordship is mistaken in your opinion of Lord Mansfield.
But supposing that my message (as your lordship calls it) were as ill-conceived and improper as you state it, you were under no necessity of delivering that message. You did not deliver it; you were not obliged to deliver any message at all. The whole passed in private conversation between us two. How could this justify that torrent of reproach with which, on cold deliberation, you have chosen to overwhelm my manners, disposition, principles, connexions, friendships, and relations; the whole tenor of the public and private conversation of my life? Was this necessary, my lord? Most men, in my situation, would think it an opportunity eagerly taken, but not very happily chosen, of breaking by a quarrel a long friendship, which, if the contrariety of our sentiments made it no longer agreeable, in wisdom ought to be rather gently and gradually unravelled, than to be so very rudely and unartificially rent asunder. This, you know, was the advice of one of our great masters in the science of life and morals, upon occasions of this unhappy nature.
  I have done, for ever, with this business. In whatever light it appears to your lordship, most people would think it a trifling error at the worst. But your second letter has opened a much higher order, and a much greater number and variety of charges against me. These are, indeed, so very grave and so very numerous, that you have given me a right to be a little burthensome and tedious to you in my answer to them. That answer ought to be full and satisfactory: first, because I had already frequently vindicated myself on several of these subjects. You remember the accusation perfectly, but, by some accident very sinister to me, you absolutely forget the defence. I think it, therefore, necessary to place it distinctly and permanently before you; in order that a memory, in this one instance a little imperfect, may not be the means of misleading the best judgment in the world.
In the next place, I would not, for any consideration, that my son should happen to meet such horrid offences charged on me, and on his nearest relations, by my seventeen years' friend, ( --  by the very person who answered for him at the font   -- ) without letting him know that I was able to say something in our defence. I would not have him come into life, oppressed by my imputed faults from my reputed friends; that the innocent child may know, as I trust the world will know and acknowledge, that he has not crept into it from an " hole of adders," to which your lordship (I leave you to feel with what humanity and justice) has thought proper to compare his father's house.
  My lord, I may have very little to leave him but the character, the friends, I would add (if I did not fear your lordship's charge of arrogance) the example of his father. It is most essential to him that these should not be rendered vile, cheap, or odious, in the opinion of mankind. In order to do him this indispensable justice,   --  in order to leave this little inheritance clear and unencumbered to him, I will consider your lordship's heavy accusation under the three heads into which it seems to be divided.
First,  --  my conduct in conjunction with my political connexions; secondly,  --   certain matters which your lordship charges to my particular account; and lastly,  --  the various crimes which your lordship has collected from the private conversations of my nearest friends and relations. To all these I shall answer fully, distinctly, and, I trust, satisfactorily.
Your lordship, assuming the persons of others whose opinions you do not condemn, considers the measures of my party, "in which I have been so forward to take a lead, as running the extreme line of wickedness." This is what your lordship states as the description of our measures; and as to our morals, you describe us, (still stating the opinion of others, of which you express no disapprobation,) "as persons who first used their sovereign basely, and then sought their justification in slandering his character." Heavy charges, both on persons and actions!
  My lord, if by accident you believe that such charges, on such men as compose our party, are groundless,  --  pray, why could you not imagine with equal justice, aided by a little of not unbecoming partiality, that my particular part in those actions, reported from the same bad authority, was not more blameable than that of the rest of our party? But if your lordship (as you seem to do) rather inclines to give credit to these imputations, then, my lord. I do freely and cheerfully take my share in the measures. I take it with such numbers and such persons, both of our own and other bodies, that I am as well defended as respectable authority and lawful example can make me. Your lordship ought to pity me, under the influence of so plausible and irresistible a seduction.
But, my lord, I do not secure a presumption in my favour, merely in the number and weight of the present opposition. If we have "run the extreme line of wickedness," there are but few now in his majesty's service who have not pushed us very hard in the race. Some have gone over one part, some another; some almost over all the course, along with us. I can recollect but a very few who can escape much better than I can, unless error is to be rectified by inconsistency of character.
Whenever your lordship, or any body else, shall distinctly specify any one of those measures, be it what it may, I will engage to call out some person now high in his majesty's service and favour, to whom I will commit the cause, who must either disgrace himself or fully vindicate our proceedings. If you do not harshly censure this ministerial advocate, permit me to say, that your lordship's justice must necessarily suffer us to escape. It is not, I am sure, the fortune and situation, but the actions of men, which become the subjects of your indignation. I am really afraid to join in your lordship's censure of our conduct, lest I should lean too heavily on some respectable persons in authority, and thus again become taxed with "ill-treating some of the highest people in the kingdom.'"
You do not think I am going into the business of six years,   --  this is infinite. No;  --  I shall go upon general but very satisfactory grounds. If the measures we have carried into legislative acts be so extremely wicked, why does not the court, with the power of the nation in their hands, redress the mischief by repealing our acts and regulations? If the measures we have proposed and lost were so wicked, we were wicked only in the intention, we have failed in the act. If the nation likes our proceedings, it enjoys the benefit of them. Posterity must judge of their intrinsic value, and of the prudence, the reach of thought, the decorum, consistency, moderation, and justice, with which they were conceived and conducted, from the beginning to the end.
Upon the merit of the ministerial conduct, that of the opposition must finally stand or fall. The matter of some part of it is not left to the representations of those that your lordship lives with. I must suppose you have not read the grounds upon which the opposition to some of the capital measures of administration have been justified; works which ought to be perused by every one, before he peremptorily attributes "the extreme line of wickedness" to the conduct of large bodies of men.
  As to "my forwardness in taking the lead in the measures of the party," I am not sure that I perfectly understand the nature of the charge. I am no leader, my lord, nor do I ever answer for the conduct of any one but myself. If your meaning be that I commonly make the motions, or am forward in laying the grounds for opposition, your lordship is certainly misinformed. I generally speak, in justification of the vote I am to give, very late in the debate. But if, by forwardness and lead, you mean nothing more than that I do, with all my heart, all my soul, and all my strength, support the measures I believe to be right, the fact is undoubtedly true. But before the fact itself, or the earnestness with which it is pursued, be clearly censurable, the measures must be proved to be wrong, or to be unimportant. My lord, it is not my interest in my own case, nor my disposition in any case, to receive the assertions of my enemies as competent proof of either; and as yet I have heard nothing else.
  After stating by an aposiopesis, the force of which mode of speech no one better understands than your lordship, that our party has "run the extreme line of wickedness,"     --     in the same mode you speak of them as having " used the king basely, and then seeking their justification in slandering his character."
  My lord,     --     in one thing you do me great justice. You say that my opinion differs very widely from yours upon this subject. It does indeed; it differs as widely as the remotest extremes can differ. To speak fully to the point is difficult; to be wholly silent, impossible. The charge is heavy, and it is as general as it is heinous. Like the former, on the measures of the party, it points to no one circumstance of action, time, or place, which can particularize it. No defence can, therefore, be made, but by opposing to it the denial of both the propositions of which the charge is compounded; and by showing, as far as general presumptions can go, the utter improbability of the existence of any truth in either of them. Indeed, my lord, you have been cruelly abused and imposed upon. I am sure I shall think myself happy, if the subject of my defence, however it may fail for myself, may be obliquely and accidentally the means of undeceiving you, in a mistaken opinion of the best characters in the kingdom.
  Before I say a word further, I must observe that your lordship is the very first from whom I ever knew that such a charge was made. I never heard it in any conversation;     --     I never read it in any of the numerous publications on the part of the court. I have always heard Lord Rockingham and his friends censured for a behaviour, rather too reserved and managed for the purposes of opposition. But I make no doubt that such discourses as you mention are held. They are held very improperly. They are held with more mischief to the persons, in whose favour they seem to be uttered, than even to those whom they intend to injure.
Will you permit me to speak on this business with a frankness suitable to its importance. Indeed, my lord, his Majesty's servants have, in my humble opinion, made too free with the sacred name of their master, both in their apologies for themselves, and in their accusations of others. I wish the gentlemen of the court to consider seriously how well they consult an honour in which we have all of us so great an interest, and in which they have so peculiar and religious a trust, when they can affirm that Lord Rockingham and his friends have treated the king basely.
  By the tenor of the sentence, I must conclude that this charge of base treatment is fixed at the time when Lord Rockingham and his friends had the honour to serve the crown. Your lordship will recollect that Lord Rockingham was called into the closet a full year after his removal from office, and pressed to resume it with large offers for himself and for his friends, and even with powers still more extensive. Do these persons, so affectedly zealous, reflect in what manner they consult the personal glory of their sovereign, when they represent him as showing such favour to, and putting such confidence in, those who were capable of treating him with baseness? Do they, in such a charge, consult the future connexion that ought ever to exist between the glory and the possible interest of their master, in case the convenience of his service should, once more, induce him to call any of those eminent persons, who are charged with having treated him basely, into employment I But if they choose, on a supposition of the validity of the charge, to suppose that such an arrangement is impossible, is it then altogether for the king's advantage to persuade such and so large bodies of men, that they are proscribed, and, as it were, disinherited by the common protector and father of all his subjects?
Besides, let me say, that though on every account the character of the sovereign ought to be preserved inviolate, and that, too, with the utmost care and tenderness, yet there are other characters to be preserved also; characters in which, though the subject has not an equal, he has yet a very considerable interest. Your lordship will hardly think it altogether prudent, (I will go no further, for I dare not return a word of the hard language I received,) wantonly to toss great names in people's faces, in order to put them out of countenance, and to oblige them either from shame to abandon their defence, or from warmth to say things which may be misinterpreted into a criminal disrespect. The former is hardly fair in argument, nor is the latter in morals, though it often may be meant innocently, as in this case I am ready to believe. It has the air of insidiously drawing men upon dangerous ground, in order to entrap them on it; and this, if I were in your lordship's place, and armed with your authority from station and knowledge, I would certainly say to those who have the levity to hold such discourses.
  I would also submit to your lordship's consideration, whether it be right to set the people upon too many inquiries into these matters, that trench so nearly upon anecdote? Certainly, my lord, the last thing the people of England will suspect in Lord Rockingham and his great friends, is any thing whatsoever of baseness, either done or suffered. They will inquire whence and how this surprising charge has arisen; and possibly, in the course of such an inquiry, their censure may fall not lightly upon those who are capable of abusing either their ears, or the ears of their sovereign, with such a gross charge upon the best subjects that he has.
Any prince might glory in having such subjects. He might well rejoice in finding that the persons who have always been the truest to the succession of his family, are most distinguished among his people for their unspotted honour and integrity, for their disinterested love of their country, and for every virtue, public and private. No wise king of Great Britain would think it for his credit to let it go abroad that he considered himself, or was considered by others, as personally at variance with a Lord Rockingham, a Duke of Richmond, a Duke of Portland, an Earl of D , the families of the Cavendishes, with a Savile, a Dowdeswell, and a very long train of names, who are the ornaments of his country in peace, and to some of whom he owes some of the greatest glories of his own, and his predecessor's reign, in all the various services of the late war. The public will not lightly believe, that the close connexions of the late Duke of Newcastle and the late Duke of Cumberland, have been capable of using basely a king of the Brunswick line.
  As little will any one credit the other part of the charge, that they sought their justification in traducing his majesty's character. Till this day they have never heard of this charge of base treatment, and, therefore, most certainly never could be put to this justification. But if you mean that they use it in defence of their measures in opposition, surely you cannot imagine that they are so miserably put to it for argument, as to have no other way of defending themselves but by traducing any character whatsoever. If they are alleged to have used such justification in parliamentary debate, the time and occasion ought to be marked. If in writing,     --     the piece ought to be shown, and ought with some probability to be carried home to them. If in conversation,     --     the informer ought to appear, and make good the matter he relates. In no other way than one of these three, can these persons have committed the offence your lordship mentions to be charged upon them.
Avoiding all offensive terms, or any kind of recrimination on their accusers, I simply say they deny the truth of the charge, and I trust nobody can bring a shadow of proof for it. I am sorry that amongst your lordship's numerous friends, you could find no one man under personal obligations to the leader of that respectable party, who might long since have removed those impressions from your lordship's mind, and rendered my poor defence unnecessary.
  I have said all I mean to say in vindication of my having gloried in my political connexions, and in the part I have taken along with them. My principles, indeed the principles of common sense, lead me to act in corps. Accident first threw me into this party. When I was again at liberty, knowledge and reflection induced me to reenter it; principle and experience have confirmed me in it. Your lordship will find it difficult to show where a man, who wished to act systematically in public business, could have arranged himself more reputably. By arranging myself with them, 1 trust I have given some sort of security to the public for my good behaviour. That versatility, those sudden evolutions, which have something derogated from the credit of all public professions, are things not so easy in large bodies, as when men act alone, or in light squadrons. A man's virtue is best secured by shame, and best improved by emulation in the society of virtuous men. Most of my public proceedings have been in the strictest concurrence with that party; and to your lordship's candour and mature consideration, I hope I may safely leave both the party and its proceedings.
  I now pass to the separate account you have opened with myself, for matters of my own private conduct. Here, my lord, you accuse me of maltreating the greatest men in the kingdom; you particularize, &c. &c., and you seem to think that I have not sufficiently "distinguished myself from useless declaimers who are valued only for bear-garden talents;" and that I have given the world an "impression of me, as a man capable of things dangerous and desperate."
This is the peculium of blame, which your lordship has portioned out to me, and separated from the common stock. Pardon me, if I think you have your accounts of me from men of little moderation;  --  indeed, from a kind and class of enemies, far below the common generosity of that adverse character. Has your lordship then found me, in the innumerable conversations that we have had together for many years (which I now remember with a melancholy pleasure), an "useless declaimer " and distinguished by "bear-garden" talents? If your lordship has not found this in my conversation, (you will not affirm that you have,) why will you so easily give credit to those, who assert that I am of another character wherever you do not happen to see me?
My lord,  --  I have written some trifles. They are, indeed, full of imperfections, but they are not altogether " useless declamations;" nor have they, I think, a great deal of the scurrilities of the " bear-garden." Some of them are written, too, on a subject of public controversy. But there I am safe enough. What a man writes, defends or accuses itself; what he speaks, is but too much at the mercy of narrators, and I have fallen amongst the very worst of that odious band.
  Hypocrisy is no cheap vice; nor can our natural temper be masked for many years together. I have not lived, my lord, at any period of my life, nor do I live at present, in societies where the talents your lordship alludes to are in any sort of request. I live, and have lived, in liberal and humanized company; who, as they could never endure such a character, would be infinitely surprised at this imputation upon a person whom at least they tolerate.
  As to some little occasional sallies out of serious business, which you have been ready to commend in other men, and which, when not ill-executed, have been commended by all ancient and modern critics, I am sure they are not without their use in popular debates. For my own part in them, I can only say, that if I could receive any comfort under your lordship's displeasure, I have the consolation not to be equally ill-thought of by every body. You know, I am sure, a person of rank", long removed from public business in which he had much distinguished himself, and who was equally distinguished for the elegance of his manners and the well-bred felicity of his wit, has a great deal more than once repeated, without any very harsh censure, some of the trifles which less grave occasions have drawn from me in the House. He has even condescended to say most obliging things to myself upon the subject. That person, I assure your lordship, is not so poor in the resources of real politeness, as to be driven to supply his deficiencies out of the fund of ill-placed flattery. He is no way connected with me, in party or otherwise. He is too considerable to be one of my admirers; and all I shall say is, he did not find in any of my little pleasantries, the relish of that celebrated academy from which your lordship is pleased to derive them.
The attacks I have made are specified to be on Mr. Grenville, Mr. Rigby, Sir William Bagot, and Lord Barrington'. You could lengthen, you say, the catalogue;  --  certainly you could; for I have had rather more altercations than are mentioned in this list, and your lordship as certainly supposes me the aggressor in all of them. As to the first, I only desire, in common justice to me, and even to Mr. Grenville, that his court friends will not be too superfluously kind to his memory; that they will not resent any injuries done to him, for which he had no resentment himself. Perhaps your lordship does not know that I had the honour of being on the best terms with Mr. Grenville, which continued uninterrupted to his death;  --  that he gave to my kinsman, William Burke, and to me a pressing invitation to his house in the country;  --  that in his house in town, upon a business too which most people would think delicate, we had a long conversation, wherein, without any dereliction of principle on either side, we settled the matter to mutual satisfaction; and that he afterwards was so obliging as to enter upon a very curious and interesting conversation, relative to many of the most essential particulars of his ministry and life. His brother, Lord Temple, is known to cherish the most affectionate reverence for his memory. I have the pleasure to assure your lordship, that I am at this instant in intimacy and on terms of friendship with Lord Temple, who most assuredly would not do me that honour, if he thought my difference in opinion with him, or his brother, had ever carried me to lengths unjustifiable among gentlemen.
  As to my supposed attack on Mr. Rigby, your lordship is then of opinion that, of course, I must have been the aggressor, and that it is impossible the known urbanity of Mr. Rigby's style of debating could have given just offence. I am at your lordship's mercy on the subject, and no disculpation can avail me; only I am to do justice to the very handsome behaviour of your friend, Mr. Rice, on that occasion.
  Sir William Bagot, my lord, made two several wanton and utterly unprovoked attacks upon me: I did nothing more than repel them; the first time with great good humour, at neither time with illtemper or ill-manners. On the latter occasion, Lord John Cavendish, a man not more remarkable for his firmness than his great moderation, interrupting my defence, declared if I had not spoken on the first occasion, he would have done it himself, and have taken nearly the same ground. Sir William Bagot seemed sensible that he had gone too far; he made some apology for it. I could name a line of witnesses to you on this business, above all suspicion of partiality to me, who know I was not the aggressor in the beginning of the dispute, nor the most bitter in the prosecution of it; and whether, on the whole, I did any discredit, on so unexpected a provocation, to my own character or to good manners, the House, who heard me with every mark of approbation, must judge. Since that time I have often met Sir William Bagot on various business, and neither of us appeared to have any remembrance of the altercation. But my offence, it seems, is perfectly recorded elsewhere, along with the rest of my indelible transgressions.
You are kind enough to tell me, as the end of the list, of my execrations of Mr. Yorke during his last illness. I wish, my lord, you had not put my patience and prudence to so sore a trial. But they will endure even that test. No man honoured Mr. Yorke, living and dead, more than myself. I hold his memory in a reverence that is almost superstitious. I know him to have possessed a wonderful erudition in all kinds. I knew him to be a person of the purest principles and morals, and of a strict and punctilious sense of honour, and that he was one who felt for fame with but too fatal a sensibility. Let me add, that I have myself a large part in his loss: he was much my friend. I say so, because I should count it impious to distrust the frequent professions of regard which I had from him. When your lordship gives me leave to know, that you hold me utterly incapable of the base act you charge upon me, I will tell you what it was that gave rise to that most malicious of all calumnies. Till then, I must content myself with assuring you, that the story, as you have heard it, is absolutely false.
Now, my lord, at the black tail of this black catalogue of accusations, let me stir up the principle of candour, which all this slander has, for a moment, smothered in you, and ask you seriously, whether you believe that, in coming into the House of Commons, " I entered like a wolf into a fold of lambs;" and with ferocious and savage fury, "snapped now at one, now at another" of those meek and passive creatures, without mercy, fear, or shame?
Does not your lordship think it possible that, in such a place, where such matters are agitated as will call out all of the wild beast that lurks in human nature, there are other animals with fangs and claws besides me? Does your lordship think it absolutely incredible, that attempts might be made to put me down, and that I may have been necessitated to make some strong efforts to keep myself up? Do you seriously think that the understandings of your narrators are better disciplined in the duties and decorums of public life than mine? Do you imagine that they are not equally liable to passions similar to mine, which may mislead them in the representation, possibly in the conception of my conduct? Have they not interests far more considerable than mine, which may as naturally bias them from the straight line of their duty? You were li overborne," you say, when you did me the very great honour of becoming my advocate, "by the number of charges against me." I am sorry that you threw up your brief so early, and that I lost, on such an insufficient ground, all the advantage of your lordship's goodness and ability; because it is evidently not the number, but the truth of the charges, that ought to prevail in any equal tribunal. If it should be otherwise, nothing will save me, either now or in future; for you may be very sure that, as many as my actions are, just so many will be the charges of my enemies. Did your lordship ever hear of a man, acting in public, who was free from them? If I were, with all expressions of tenderness, friendship, and compassion, to write down but one-half of the language of their enemies, concerning any given public persons whom you know and esteem, I am very much afraid, if I sent it to you, your lordship would think it little else than a libel; if I sent it to any of themselves, you would think it a gross insult.
Suppose that one of the best friends they have, were to make such a collection, for the instruction and entertainment of Lord Chatham or Lord Mansfield, the Duke of Grafton or of Lord North. They are greater men than I;     --     they have the advantage of their dignity. Worse things have been said of them. Your lordship does not think that the eminence of their station ought to make the hearing of truth less necessary to them, or make it less proper for them to hear it with temper. In what light would you consider such a communication to these persons: even though it were made lest they should happen not to be apprised of the tone of their enemies, or be unacquainted with the language of an uniform series of five years' daily newspapers?
  I know well enough what my enemies say: I know too what my conscience answers to their malice. My public conduct, co-extensive with my largest relation, must be my glory or my shame. Has your lordship found one single part of it to be praiseworthy?
  If I act in party, you more than insinuate that the party runs the extreme line of wickedness; if I act alone, then I have some wickedness of supererogation beyond that line; some eccentric crimes to answer for. In every altercation I am the aggressor; my debate is declamation; my railing, the bear-garden; in my motions, I show myself capable of things dangerous and desperate; the daily conversations of my friends and relations, are guilty of all the malignity of treason; my house, by the deductions of no exceptionable logic, easily taken for an hole of adders.
  My lord, all this and more, are your sentiments of me, I trust expressed in anger, and in the vehemence of a mistaken zeal; from which no talents, nor situation, will always exempt even men of piety and virtue. If, indeed, you censure many material parts of my little public system, I do not wonder that you condemn the whole. My principles are all settled and arranged, and, indeed, at my time of life, and after so much reading and reflection, I should be ashamed to be caught at hesitation and doubt, when I ought to be in the midst of action, not as I have seen some to be, as Milton says,  "unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek.'" However, this necessary use of the principles I have will not make me shut my ears to others which, as yet, I have not, only I wish to act upon some that are rational.
  "I ill-treat the first men in the kingdom." If you show me that in no case this may be my duty, I will confess I am in the wrong. I am a respecter of authority; but, my lord, I execute my share of an important magistracy; and I conceive that it may happen to be part of my office to accuse, and even very ill-treat, the first men in the kingdom. Would your lordship have me so treat clerks in office, who transcribe letters, or sergeants of the guard, who execute orders?
  "I attacked Lord Harrington:"  --  I did so; and, let me add, I attacked Lord Weymouth as much as him; and I attacked Lord Hillsborough ' as much as either, though on another ground. But I did this in a regular, sober, constitutional manner. However, I bear your censure the better, as I am absolutely satisfied that, to this minute, you neither know a single ground on which I made the attack, nor the temper with which I conducted myself, in any of the proceedings upon which you charge me. I never made more than two motions. As to that on St. George's Fields, I did in effect repeat it; and I never slept so happily as after I had discharged myself of that accusation. I now give over the pursuit, not as blameable, but hopeless. It was, indeed, very nearly what your lordship calls it, a proceeding "dangerous and desperate;"  --  desperate as to hope of success,  --  dangerous, as it has been a means of forfeiting your good opinion. To its object it proved very innoxious; it has not diminished a shilling of Lord Barrington's salary. But if it had succeeded, I have no doubt that very salutary effects to the public would have followed from it.
  I acted to the best of my judgment. It would be hard to find a bad motive for my conduct in this particular. I am a man of none but civil talents, such as they are; and I can have no views from a state of disorder and confusion; no, not more even than your lordship.
Your lordship tells me "it is not what pretensions I may have, but what the world will choose to allow me." What pretensions, my lord, am I making to any thing that the world has to allow or to refuse? I make no pretensions, my lord, but those which, with God's blessing, no power can take from me; those of doing my duty agreeably to my own ideas, within the laws of the land, and the rules and orders of the body to which I belong; and I will do that duty with such vigour, or such remission, as I may think will best answer the purpose of my trust. If by pretensions you mean places, I solicit none, and I really think I never shall; though I would very gladly serve the crown, and be of use to my own family, if I could do it with honour.
Your lordship, whose mean opinion of me I lament, but cannot avoid, formerly thought it (as you now tell me) insanity in me to look to an employment then vacant. This matter of mad ambition give me leave to explain.
Lord Rockingham, as you observe, and as I knew, was on the point of being turned out of office. I had observed, what I might do without great sagacity, that the having filled any considerable place, did raise the credit and authority of men much higher than any other circumstance whatever. Looking for what has happened,    --   a long minority, I thought the name of such an employment might be of some use, for (as your lordship may, if you please, guess) I never meant to keep it. However mad this idea may have been, it only floated on my mind. I talked to a friend or two, and beat the thing backward and forward in conversation. The ministry was changed a very few days after. It was no formed project:   --   I never so much as spoke to Lord Rockiugham upon it;   --   this he knows,   --   and there is the whole of my madness.
Your lordship at that time, you say, advised me to make "a seat at the board of trade my object." I dare say you did, though I confess I forget the conversation. It is undoubtedly a very honourable employment, and much above my deserts;   --   if the parallel was only between that office and those deserts. That place was, however, not my object; among other reasons, for one that was very obvious,   --   that there was then no vacancy. The employment, to which I wished the nomination, was open.
Your lordship thought, and still seems to think me insane, in wishing that employment upon another idea;   --   because I had then only been private secretary to a minister. This oblique insinuation I might leave where I found it, if I did not think that your lordship grounded your opinion on very mistaken principles, whatever the merit of the particular matter then in question might have been. I must, therefore, beg leave again humbly to express my sentiments, though they should again be treated as the effect of phrensy.
  1 did not ground my pretensions on any supposed rank of private secretary. This employment I knew, as well as any body did, formed no pretension; because it was no known office, nor bears any rank whatsoever in the state. But I conceived then, and still do so, that the rule of preferment in the offices of this kingdom, is not Mere official gradation. The rank in office is to be rated by the rank which men hold in parliament, and by that only. This rank, though not exactly definable, is very easily understood; and the name and thing have been much in the mouths of all public men. If the rule of official rank were any other, the consequence, according to my ideas, would obviously tend to the utter relinquishment of any but the most slavish and passive conduct, in all those who ever look to the service of the state. Indeed, it would be fatal to the state itself.
  On your lordship's standard I must have very low hopes, or none at all. I have no more official pretensions now than I had the first hour of my election. I therefore, my lord, refuse to admit your lordship's rule, and I am authorized not only by reason but by practice. Many have made their first step as high as that you allude to, and much higher, and all from parliamentary, not official ground. I do not name them, for fear of your lordship's censure of arrogance in the comparison. But, my lord, other gentlemen held actually that very office afterwards which I wished for only in designation; who, though I very highly respect them, I will not believe stood higher on parliamentary ground than I did.
  I think, my lord, very poorly of Ned Burke or his pretensions; but, by the blessing of God, the just claims of active members of parliament shall never be lowered in the estimation of mankind by my personal or official insignificance. The dignity of the House shall not be sunk by my coming into it. At the same time, my lord, I shall keep free from presumption. If ever things should stand in such a situation as to entitle me to look to office, it is my friends who must discover the place I hold in parliament, I never shall explain it. Rank is not my object for my own sake, I assure you; for if ever 1 were to ask for employment, (as I shall not,) vanity would not be my guide in my requests. Some service to my own honest interests, and to those of others, would be my rule. For I protest most solemnly that, in my eye, situated as I am, and thinking as I do of the intrinsic dignity of an active but independent member of parliament, I should look upon the highest office the subject could aspire to, as an object rather of humiliation than of pride. It would very much arrange me in point of convenience; it would do nothing for me in point of honour.
  To purge away all further symptoms of insanity, in not admitting your lordship's rule of official gradation, permit me to say, that even at the time you allude to, I was not very young, but as much a man as I am now, and as fit for any kind of business. I was as little inclined to the course of changing about with every wind, without regard to men or things; and when you combine these two circumstances, of time of life and some aim at uniformity of conduct, the madness would be in acting upon the ground taken from official gradation, and not from parliamentary rank; even if such ground had been thought of in this country, or that rule had been laid down for any man in it except myself. My friends know whether I have harassed them with requests, or whether my pretensions ever deranged their business, or disturbed their quiet. Till they complain, every one else, methinks, may well be silent.
  I could say a great deal on the ground of men's pretensions in this country, but there is more than enough for both of us. Your lordship has compelled me to speak more than I wish, upon places and employments. It is a subject not often in my thoughts, nor likely to be greatly my concern, even though your lordship has removed the terrors of the proscription which hung over me, by securing me an asylum in my native insignificance. This humble cottage, which is not to be shaken even pulsante Caesarea manu, I take refuge in most joyfully. Your lordship is so condescending, to offer to enter it along with me, but I beg you to go no further than the door; it is, indeed, a sort of lodging as unsuitable to your dignity as to your abilities.
Your lordship tells me that my ideas of that proscription had arisen only from my imagination having outrun my judgment. I have no such races between my imagination and my judgment, as your lordship, who speaks the language of my enemies like a native, is pleased to suppose. They have no king's plate before them to animate the contention. They are a pair of slow and orderly beasts of very little figure, but fit enough to draw together, and, I trust, to pull themselves and their poor master out of all the mire into which our enemies have endeavoured to plunge us. It was neither my arrogance, nor my irregular imagination, that induced me to think as I did. Your lordship told me "that I might put it out of the power of any possible administration to serve me." Who is there but the king, who can restrain the powers of any possible administration? And when you assured me that "this was most certainly true" I did believe you said it upon some good authority; I did not say whose authority it was. It was, my lord, my ignorance of courts, not my arrogance, that made me put this plain interpretation upon plain words. For, knowing those of high place only by hearsay, I have read, that monarchs in former days had sometimes been, by advisers very unlike themselves, induced to turn the tremendous majesty of their resentments on objects as low and unworthy as myself. Your lordship will, therefore, pardon this error, in which there was nothing worse than, what is inevitable to a man of my condition,  --  a want of knowledge of the great world. This probable proscription that I had so much dreaded, I am now, it seems, only to understand as your lordship's own conjecture, arising from the favourable light under which you have been, for some time, accustomed to behold my conduct. As to "your having no pain in doing ill-natured things," I knew and felt a man of the very reverse character; but in your lordship's letters, I know nothing of my old friend but the handwriting, which I know but too well.
  After giving the testimony of my enemies, as grounds of charge against me, your lordship comes to their assistance, towards the close of your letter, with a little of your own; and this too for a purpose, which, even after all I had read, did not a little astonish me. It was in justification of the libellers for having fixed on me as the author of Junius, from a resemblance which your lordship supposes my house bears to "an hole of adders." My lord, I am sorry to find that these writers have so able an advocate, which, though they stand in need of, I have not at all the charity to wish them. But since these worthy gentlemen are under your lordship's protection, I say not one word against them, except that, in this instance, they did not reason logically, nor draw their conclusions in any good form. For, passing that most obliging simile of "the adders' hole" as not in strict argument, I did not "furnish the premises " your lordship supposes; and if I had, the conclusion of these gentlemen was irregular. For, supposing all your lordship says was not very greatly mistaken, how does it follow from the discourses of my friends, that I am the author of Junius,   --   as these worthy persons peremptorily assert? Let me advance a step further, and suppose that the discourses which your lordship charges on my friends were not theirs, but my own; it must be proved that no other persons have held similar discourses, before the singular proposition of the conclusion could be valid against me. Hardly as your lordship thinks of us, you will scarcely assert that we have a monopoly of such discourse. Indeed, there is no putting this argument in any way in which it will do; and I must still think as I did before, that these gentlemen or their employers did not act in a manner altogether justifiable in drawing such a conclusion, from any premises with which your letter supposes them to have been furnished. Nothing but your good-nature, which is always in existence, but, unfortunately for me, transferred to my worst enemies, could make you entertain a better opinion of that sort of logic. My lord, this part of your letter is indeed very serious. The crimes are high,  --  the accuser of great authority,  --  and the persons accused my nearest and dearest friends. You would think me, I am sure, the basest of friends, the worst of brothers, and the most unworthy and unnatural of all men, if I took in very good part, and as an act of kindness, your lordship's charges against them.
  My lord, Mr. William Burke, the first you set to the bar, has had the closest and longest friendship for me; and has pursued it with such nobleness in all respects, as has no example in these times, and would have dignified the best periods of history. Whenever I was in question, he has been not only ready, but earnest even, to annihilate himself; and he has not been only earnest but fortunate, in his endeavours in my favour. Looking back to the course of my life, I remember no one considerable benefit in the whole of it, which I did not, mediately or immediately, derive from him. To him I owe my connexion with Lord Rockingham. To him I am indebted for my seat in parliament. To him it is I must refer all the happiness and all the advantages I received from a long acquaintance with your lordship. For me he gave up a respectable employment of a thousand pounds a year, with other very fair pretensions. He gave up an employment which he filled with pleasure to himself, with great honour to himself, and with great satisfaction to his principal in office. Indeed, he both held and quitted it with such a well-arranged discharge of all his duties, that a strict friendship subsists between him and the principal he left, from that moment even to this, amidst all the rage and confusion of parties. But he resigned it to give an example and an encouragement to me,  --  not to grow fearful and languid in the course to which he had always advised me. To encourage me, he gave his own interest the first stab;  --  Ptete, non dolet. This, my lord, was true friendship; and if I act an honourable part in life, the first of all benefits, it is in great measure due to him. He loved your lordship too, and would have died for you,  --  I am thoroughly persuaded he would. He had the most ardent affection for you, and the most unbounded confidence in you. If there was any difference in his regard for you and me, it is, that there were certain disparities which made him look up to you with greater reverence. Such a friendship can grow in none but a soil favourable to, and producing every kind of virtue; and, accordingly, he has nothing like a fault about him, that does not arise from the luxuriance of some generous quality. Do not "disinherit your son" for any thing Will Burke is capable of doing. I look with pleasure and with the most auspicious hopes, and with, I am sure, very unaffected good wishes on your growing family. But if I was their father, my prayer in their favour would be for half his virtues. I would ask for no more, because I would wish a good man to be happy and prosperous in the world.
  My lord, I owe this honest testimony, all I can return, for a friendship of which I can never make myself deserving. As to him, my lord, I am not capable of telling you in what manner he felt your charges. He answers nothing to them; he only bids me tell you, that never being able to suppose himself in a situation of serious controversy with your lordship, much less as the culprit in a criminal accusation for a matter of state, brought by you upon his private conversation, he knows not what to say. He is at your mercy. He really cannot put his pen to paper on this subject, though he has two or three times attempted it. Permit me, my lord, on this very serious head, to lay before your lordship a very few matters for your consideration. I feel myself as averse to stating this matter to your lordship, in a style of controversy, as my friend is incapable of it. Will your lordship, then, have the goodness to consider that the conversations of your friend, to which your lordship gives, in your passion, such very hard names, have passed entirely between, you and him, that they have passed in the freedom of friendship,  --  in the openness of the most unreserved confidence. Is it true, that no one was witness to any thing capable of such a construction, out of the inmost recesses of your own family? Does your lordship recollect, that there was any stranger present in any mixed company, either at your house or elsewhere, who heard any such conversation? Now, my lord, if there be no such witness out of your own family, (te consule,) might it not be rather the entire confidence that Mr. Burke reposed in your honour, than any indiscretion, which had induced him to enter with you into topics in themselves delicate and extremely capable of misconstruction!  I never will believe the loosest flow of the heart, in all its temporary feelings, to be indiscreet in conversation with you.
  My lord, there is another consideration which I would beg leave to submit to you upon these supposed culpable conversations. I believe, if you call to mind times and circumstances, you will find that there could scarce have passed any private political conversation between Will Burke and your lordship for near three years. A very hard statute was made concerning words, in the reign of King Charles the Second; but hard as it was, it limited the prosecution to be within * * *; otherwise, the statute would not have been hard but intolerable, and the reason is extremely clear. Words are fugitive; and the lapse of a little time may cancel such a variety of explanatory circumstances in the mind of the party accused, as extremely to enfeeble, perhaps entirely to destroy a very full defence. Besides, the memory of the informers may be full as fallacious as that of the party charged. If he has not set down the words, their true spirit may well have escaped him; if he has, it furnishes a very just presumption that he has stored up this invidious matter for so long a time, not for the purposes of justice, but of malice. Your lordship will tell me that you are not now making a charge in a court of justice, Very true; but permit me to say, that the equity and reason of these rules ought to be carried into all personal reproaches and revilings for supposed similar offences so long passed. When any person has not, at the time, expressed any disapprobation of these discourses, every principle of justice precludes him, and ought to stop his month for ever. Your lordship does, in effect, admit that you heard, without any marks of disapprobation, discourses to which your lordship now gives appellations that, for your own sake, I cannot bear to repeat. You say that a "dislike of altercation and a respect to your profession," hindered you from expressing your sentiments at the time. May I presume to differ in this point, and to think that it was so far from being contrary to the duties and decencies of your sacred profession, that nothing was more strictly within both, than to give grave and sober counsel upon such occasions, to those with whom you condescended to live. If the immediate moment was too sudden, or the parties appeared too warm, advice upon the next day would have been prudent from a wise man, proper from a friend, charitable from a divine,  --  full as much so (pardon the weakness of my judgment) as to keep charges of this kind in your own bosom for upwards of two years, and then to produce those charges for the first time, in the spirit and language of the bitterest reproach, not against the speaker of the words, but against a third person, (myself,) in order to aggravate accusations against me, which you have carried on with much earnestness, though without any provocation, real or pretended.
  My lord, there was no reason drawn from profession or temper, (I beg leave to say,) for your silence and your forbearance at that time, that does not, as strongly at least, subsist against your reproaches and your warmth at this. If you thought these conversations unadvised, it was a reason for advice; if you thought they argued depravity, it was a reason for rupture. Far from it. After, long after, any period you can assign for such supposed conversation, much intercourse has passed between Will Burke and your lordship; and I do not remember that you have treated our common friend, at any time of our long acquaintance, with warmer demonstrations of affection; some of which, when you please, I will point out to your lordship's recollection. I therefore am obliged to conclude, that your lordship's memory has not done its office quite perfectly on this occasion; and that the discourses which passed so long ago, were of a different nature from what you consider them in the moment of your present zeal and warmth.
  As to my brother, I am bound to do him justice at the very least. He is too near to me to make it decent for me to speak what I think of him, and which others would say with more propriety and with equal pleasure. I assure you, my lord, his majesty has not those who serve him in the highest, as he does in the lowest capacity, who are better affected to his government, or more capable of doing it honour or service. My lord, he heard with great astonishment, and some feeling, your lordship's criminal accusations, so heavy in the matter and unmanaged in the epithets. He would immediately have answered for himself, but I interposed, and took it into hands very equal to it, for it stands in no need of skill or ability. First, my lord, I must observe, as in the case of my kinsman so in that of my brother, not one of the persons who make the charges upon me, do allege his conversations as the cause. This is your lordship's own,  --  peculiar and appropriate. My lord, please to recollect, in the next place, that no late discourses of his could possibly give offence, or furnish ground for the late presumption against me; for the justification of which presumption your lordship has referred to those supposed discourses of his. He is but just returned to the kingdom, after an absence of two years. He was actually not returned to England at the time when this hue and cry of the court was raised against me. So far as to the late presumed public conversations; in which, my lord, it is simply,  --  not improbable,  --  but absolutely impossible he should have been the cause and ground of recent accusations against me.
But if your lordship supposes that the impropriety and publicity of conversations in former days, has made such an impression as to produce this effect at such a distance of time, be so good as to recollect the extreme improbability of the charge. A great part of the time he spent in England was, from a melancholy accident, passed in his bed or chair; some time he spent in Ireland. My lord, his acquaintance beyond my closest connexions is very limited. Who of those makes this charge upon him? Who is it that charges him, except your lordship? You, indeed, proceed against him in a manner, in which I do not so readily recognise your lordship's natural and usual generosity. You bring a charge upon him which, in your way of making it, it is impossible, in case of the most perfect innocence, that he should be able to refute. The charge (dropping the handsome epithet) is not for indecorum, or indiscretion, but for falsehood. The only defence, therefore, (if the fact of the words were once admitted,) would be to plead that the words were true. My lord, will you seriously say, that you would suffer him to allege any sort of proofs of the truth of such an assertion as you suppose? Would you not consider the very attempt to be a new offence;  --  would you not consider it as an offence ten times heavier than the first? Recollect that the informations for libels have lately been purged of the word false. This, if legally, was very properly done; as the lawyers have been in a practice of not giving evidence to the falsehood, or admitting disculpatory testimony to the truth. I confess I should carefully imitate this proceeding of the lawyers, in my intercourse with mankind; and would think it very unjust and improper in me, to accuse any man with a departure from veracity, where his attempt to prove the truth would be more dangerous to him than his admitting the falsehood with which he stood charged. But. my lord, my brother puts himself on his defence, and does totally deny the fact. Who, out of your own family, was present at any such discourse, at any time? My brother never had the honour of being often in your lordship's company; when he was, he stood in some awe, though in no sort of fear of you. He has had very few political discourses with you, and never any thing resembling a political dispute, but one. This was on your lordship's ending a conversation, of which I was (as I am now) the unhappy subject, with declaring that "party operated to eradicate every virtue out of the heart of man." On that occasion he grew into some warmth, and retorted on other factions some of the charges your lordship had made upon me. This, my lord, he never mentioned to me, until his necessary justification drew it from him. He proceeded to justify the propriety of oppositions by the principles of the revolution, in which he said they were founded. So far from blaming that glorious event, or its sound principles,  --  he assumed them as the very ground of his argument. He asserts that he never had any other discourse with your lordship about the revolution. Consider, my lord, how easy it is, for a passionate recollection of a passionate debate, to confound matters strangely. Suppose, my lord, I was to say that the revolution could not be supported, if some lesser modes of opposition could not be also justified. My lord, I do say it,  --  but I say it upon paper. This, in conversation of years' standing, the hearer might forget to have been an hypothetical proposition. The little piddling monosyllable "if" might slip out of the memory, and the thing stand in all the glare of a criminal offence;  --  so dangerous it is to mention such things without their necessary adjuncts,  --  the time, the occasion, the posture of the debate, the purpose of the speaker; -- so dangerous, after a long time past, to mention them at all, in a style of accusation or reproach.
Supposing some impropriety in my brother's language, with regard to the persons in power; I must beg leave to observe, that being uttered only to yourself, very vulgar generosity would as easily pardon the natural warmth of a brother, as I do from my soul, and most unaffectedly, forgive the reflection on me which gave occasion to that warmth in him. At any rate, this imprudence never went beyond the very inside of your own family. Both my friends, however, do insist upon it, that such discourses as your lordship supposes, may not be confounded with strong censures upon what are sometimes, though with great impropriety, called the king's measures. However, it is the only comfort they have, if your lordship persists in the charge, that you charge them with nothing in which, by your lordship's own account, they are not involved with the very best of men, and best affected subjects his majesty can boast of.
With regard to these discourses of my brother and my friend, you say you " have done all you could; you did not publish them." I am always fond of doing justice to your lordship's actions; you did very rightly and wisely. If your lordship takes the word " publishing" in the vulgar sense, for making generally known, be pleased to reflect, if your lordship's idea be founded, that they themselves held these discourses, and very publicly, in other places (as you infer by an argument ci fortiori from their private conversation in your house); then, my lord, your publication of what they said to you, would be the most idle and superfluous piece of zeal in the world. They have saved you the invidious and unpleasant task of revealing private conversation. If your lordship means by "publication " (as the lawyers sometimes do) any communication, and would apply it, as a discovery, to persons in power, it would be a proceeding, I am sure, wholly shocking to the nobleness of your nature, to make any charge where, by the circumstances, it is impossible to oppose to it any kind of defence. But if you meant by publication, a denunciation as a matter criminal, your lordship must have, while our laws stand in vigour, quite other sort of matter and other sort of proof, I assure you, than I think you could possibly bring on the occasion.
Whilst I do justice to the rectitude of your conduct, I cannot acknowledge it as any thing of favour, kindness, or friendship; and, therefore, only wish you had not said "you had done all you could," for you could do nothing else in common sense and common justice.
Almost every word in the last page but one of your letter, carries a sting with it. You charge my friends with * * *  This is all full of various, odd, and complicated charges and insinuations, but all conveying matter of invidious, and, to us, most dangerous reflection, easily understood in the gross, though hard enough to be developed into the particulars. However, my lord, my desire of giving complete satisfaction to your lordship and to justice, induces me to bring it into distinctness as well as I am able.
  By the discourses which your lordship holds to be so obnoxious and imprudent, I must suppose your lordship must mean, that my friends have, at some time or other, thrown out some very severe strictures on the memory of those princes who have so long since demised. I am compelled, whether I will or no, to think this the gist of the accusation, because some gentlemen who have been considered, I know not how justly, as professed and very public advocates and admirers of that illustrious family, have had no sort of reason to think their persons to be obnoxious, or their discourses to be imprudent. Nay, some who were so attached to that family, as to hold close connexions with such as pretended, however falsely, to belong to it, have had no reason to repent of this their close connexion and enthusiastic attachment. I will not say, my lord, that my friends may not, in argument, where they thought things swayed too much to that side, have spoken rather disrespectfully (but they thought safely) of a king one hundred years dead; and others have heard them do it. People will say many things in argument, and when they are provoked by what they think extravagant notions of their adversaries. Nay, it is not uncommon, when men are got into debates, to take now one side, now another, of a question, as the momentary humour of the man and the occasion called for, with all the latitude that the antiquated freedom and ease of English conversation among friends did, in former days, encourage and excuse; and, indeed, in speaking to your lordship, they thought themselves, I dare say, equally safe, whether they commended or blamed any part, or all, of that individual family. As to me, my lord, on whom the light thrown on my friends is brought to reflect with undiminished lustre, I assure you that I have always spoken and thought on that subject, with all that perfect calmness which belongs to it. My passions are not to be roused, either on the side of partiality, or on that of hatred, by those who lie in their cold lead, quiet and innoxious, in the chapel of Henry, or the churches of Windsor Castle or La Trappe. Quorum Flaminid tegitur cinis atque Latind. My opinion of the truth or falsehood of facts related in history, is formed on the common rules of criticism; my opinion of characters, on those rules and the common principles of morality. I have no side in these matters, as your lordship has a little invidiously put it; but I will always speak what I think, without caring one farthing what is the bon ton upon the subject, either at court or in coffee-houses, until all honest freedom of disquisition, and all manly liberty of speech, shall, by legal or other power, be conclusively put an end to. Good reasons may exist for such a restraint, and perhaps we are at the eve of it; but until the time does actually arrive, I shall cherish and cultivate in myself and those I love, a decent freedom of speech in public, all freedom of speech among confidential friends, where other principles than those of decorum are the lawgivers. To this freedom, your lordship's friends the ancients (in a language you understand much better than I do) gave an honourable name, and classed it among the virtues. But whether a virtue, or only an enjoyment, I assure your lordship that neither courts nor town-halls, with all they could give of gold boxes or pensions, would indemnify me for the want of an hour's use of it. You tell me that these historical discussions "are usually held the tests of principles."Possibly they may I, however, do not apprehend that I am responsible for the opinions of the vulgar, till I adopt them. My lord, I have not learned my public principles in any such wild, unsystematic, and preposterous a mode. I have taken them from quite other sources than those of Mr. Carte or M. Rapin de Thoyras. My principles enable me to form my judgment upon men and actions in history, just as they do in common life, and are not formed out of events and characters, either present or past. History is a preceptor of prudence, not of principles. The principles of true politics are those of morality enlarged; and I neither now do, nor ever will, admit of any other.
But when your lordship speaks of tests of public principles, there is one which you have not mentioned, but which, let me say, is far above them all;  --  the actions and conduct of men. Let mine, and those of my friends, speak for our public principles. If the last six years are not enough, let us be on our trial for six more. That, indeed, is in the hands of Providence, not in ours. But I trust that He who has made honest fame a lawful object of prayer and pursuit, and the possession of it to stand second in the order of his blessings, will give us means and will to live down all charges and aspersions. The principles that guide us in public and in private, as they are not of our devising, but moulded into the nature and essence of things, will endure with the sun and moon,  --  long, very long after whig and tory, Stuart and Brunswick, and all such miserable bubbles and playthings of the hour, are vanished from existence and from memory. My friends and myself may sink into errors, and even into considerable faults; but I trust that these principles will buoy us up again, so that we shall have something to set against our imperfections, and stand with the world, at least, not as the worst men or the worst citizens of our day.
  My lord,  --  in charging us with indiscretion, together with the word "Stuarts" you have coupled the revolution. If I were to guess at a charge of indiscretion from the credit and fortunes of men, I should on this occasion suppose we had spoken too favourably of that event. But do you mean the contrary, -- and, under this and the foregoing words, seriously intend to insinuate a charge of Jacobitism? Then, be it so. I am afraid that our enemies, who do not allow us common virtues, will hardly agree with you in giving us the credit of so amazing and supernatural a fidelity; that, at the expense of fame and fortune, and every thing dear to man, we should choose to be attached to a person when he is deserted by the whole world and by himself,  --  when he has not, (as 1 am told,) so much as a single Scotch, English, or Irish footman about him. Truly, we never were so wonderfully dazzled with the splendour of actual royalty, as to be captivated with what is not even the shadow of it, nor ever was so in my time. If you mean that not our attachments but our principles are of that sort,  --   favourable to arbitrary power, -- truly, in our present connexions, we have brought those principles to the very worst imaginable market; when the very best, in common opinion, was directly open before us. We have built our Chalcedon5, with the chosen part of the universe full in our prospect. But, my lord, I must again attribute these reflections to an overwarmth in your temper, or an error in your memory, or to both. My brother, my friend, and myself, never have for a moment thought other of the revolution, than as of an act, just, necessary, and honourable to this nation, whose liberty and prosperity it has insured to this time,  --  and will for ages, if its true principles be well adhered to. Your lordship is more indulgent than we wish. I cannot admit that men have a liberty of taking, seriously and dogmatically, what side they please in this question. I do not mean in this, or in any thing, to abridge any man's private liberty; but I am sure, that man is not safely placed in any weighty public trust in this kingdom, who thinks of the revolution in any other manner than that which I have mentioned.
This is no matter of historical criticism,  --  it is a moral conclusion, on an undisputed fact. A man who condemns the revolution, has no longer any obnoxious persons to hang his principles on, and, therefore, he and they may be made but too convenient to the executive powers of the time;  --  but, for this reason, he is much more dangerous than formerly to the constitution and liberties of his country. Let me add further, that a man who praises the fact of the revolution, and abandons its principles,  --  substituting the instrumentalpersons and establishments consequential to that event, in the place of its ends, is as bad as the former. To me, indeed, he seems to be infinitely worse, as he can have no sound moral principles of any kind, nor be a fit servant for honest government in any mode whatever. The one has lost his attachment, the last has deserted his principles; and the last is, by far, the most culpable and the most dangerous. These are, and always were, my sentiments and expressions on the revolution, drawn from principles of public law and natural justice, well spun and firmly wove together, not patched out of party-coloured rags, picked from the filthy dunghills of old women's superstitions and children's credulity,  --   not from Fuller's warming-pan, or Gates' plot,  --  Ferguson's manifesto, or Manwaring's massacre,  --  no, nor from the paltry memoirs of that age, which I would as soon take for its history, as I would take the authority of "the Whisperer" for the events of this reign, or that of the pensioners of the present court for the character of King George the Second.
I say nothing of Will Burke's early habits,  --  you know them. If I were to mention those of my brother, his education, not so learned as yours, had been however, at least as much, in the utmost severity of whig principles; but I say nothing of that infused education which is as nothing. We came both of us pretty early into our own hands, and our principles are of our own putting together. Those who do not like them, will have nothing to do with any of us. I thought, however, that we had, in the main, the same principles with those of your lordship, and that this similarity in the great lines was one of the grounds of your former kindness.
  I have spoken fully to the first part of the series of charges, on the principles of my friends, which are mine also. You mention at the end of the roll of obnoxious tenets, which my friends were so indiscreet as to utter in your company, in former times, the Irish rebellion, by which I suppose you mean the great rebellion of 1641. I all along suspected that your lordship had mistaken my discourses with you, for those of my friends. This convinces me of it. Will. Burke, or my brother, most certainly never have spoken to you on the subject. They know little or nothing of the Irish history. They have never thought on it at all. I have studied it with more care than is common. I have spoken to you on the subject, I dare say, twenty times. This mustard-bowl is my thunder. "Me  --  Me  --  adsum qui feci: nihil ille nee ausus nee potuit" Indeed, I have my opinion on that part of history, which I have often delivered to you,  --  to every one I have conversed with on the subject, and which I mean still to deliver, whenever the occasion calls for it, which is  --  that the Irish rebellion of 1641 was not only (as our silly things called ' histories' call it) not utterly unprovoked, but that no history I have ever read, furnishes an instance of any that was so provoked; and that in almost in all parts of it, it has been extremely and most absurdly misrepresented.
  I assure you I am not single in that opinion. Several now living think so. The late Mr. Yorke thought so, and expressed himself so in debate in the House of Commons, on the nullum tempus Bill, as well as to myself in conversation. I really thought our history of Ireland so terribly defective, that I did, and with success, urge a very learned and ingenious friend of yours and mine, in the university of Dublin, to undertake it. I dare say he will do it ably and faithfully; but if he thinks that any thing unfavourable to his principles will be deduced from telling the truth, or cares for vulgar malignity on that occasion, he is much more below the task than I can prevail on myself to think him. As to my principles on this subject, I must leave them to your mercy. I have told you what I know to be true in fact. If I were to reason on that event, and to affirm it justifiable, you might say I showed myself a friend to rebellion. If I blamed it, you might say I was attached to the doctrines of passive obedience. This is an ugly dilemma. I don't remember to have said either the one or the other; but if people must make a conclusion concerning my character from what I did do, and shall say, on this subject, all that in charity and decency they ought to conclude is, that I am no lover of oppression, nor believer in malignant fables; what they will conclude, is their affair, not mine. This was necessary to bring this charge, and, indeed, all the others, from my friends to the true object,  -- myself.
  

  
  

  






