A PRETTY STORY
Written in the year 1774
Chap. I.
Once upon a time, a great while ago, there lived a certain nobleman, who had long possessed a very valuable farm, and had a great number of children and grand-children.
Besides the annual profits of his farm, which were very considerable, he kept a large shop of goods; and being very successful in trade, he became in process of time exceeding rich and powerful, insomuch that all his neighbours feared and respected him.
He had examined all the known systems of economy, and selected from them, for the government of his own family, all such parts as appeared to be equitable and beneficial, and omitted those which experience had shown to be inconvenient or prejudicial: or rather, by blending their several constitutions together, he had so ingeniously counter-balanced the evils of one by the benefits of another, that the advantages were fully enjoyed, and the inconveniences scarcely felt.
He never exercised any undue authority over his children or servants; neither indeed could he greatly oppress them, if he was ever so disposed; for it was particularly covenanted in his marriage articles, that he should never impose any task or hardships upon his children without the consent of his wife.
Now the custom in his family was this:  -  that at the end of every seven years his marriage became null and void, at which time his children and grand-children met together and chose another wife or him, whom the old gentleman was obliged to marry under the same articles and restrictions as before. By this means the children had always a great interest in their mother-in-law, and through her a reasonable check upon their father's temper. For, besides that he could do nothing material respecting them without her approbation, she was sole mistress of the purse-strings, and gave him from time to time such sums as she thought necessary for the expenses of his family.
Being one day in a very extraordinary good humour, he gave his children a writing underhand and seal, by which he released them from many badges of dependence, and confirm to them several very important privileges. The chief of these were, that none of this children should be punished for any offence, or supposes offence, until twelve of his brethren had examined the facts, and declared him subject to such punishment; and, secondly, he renewed his assurances that no tasks or hardships should be imposed upon them without the consent of their mother-in-law.
This writing, on account of its singular importance, was called THE GREAT PAPER. After it was executed with the utmost solemnity, he caused his chaplain to publish a dire anathema against all who should attempts to violate the articles of the Great Paper, in the words following:
"in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen! Whereas our Lord and Master, to the honour of God, and for the common profit of this farm, hath granted for him and his heirs for ever, these articles above-written; I is chaplain in spiritual pastor of all of this farm, do admonish the people of this farm, once, twice, and thrice.  -  Because that shortness will not suffer so much delay is to give knowledge to the people of these presents in writing: I therefore enjoin all persons, of what is state soever they be, that they, and every of them, as much as in them is, shall uphold and maintain these articles, granted by our Lord and Master, in all points. And all those that in any point do resist, or break, or in any manner, hereafter procure, counsel, or anyways assents to, resist, or breaking these ordinances, or go about it by word or deed, openly or privately, by any manner or pretense or colour; I, the aforesaid chaplain, I my authority, do excommunicate and accurse; and from the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and from all the company of heaven, and from all the sacraments of holy church, do sequester and exclude."
CHAP. II.
Now it came to pass, that this nobleman had, by some means or other, acquired a right to an immediate tract of wild, uncultivated country, at a vast distance from his mansion-house. But he set little store by this estate, as he yielded him no profit, Nor is it likely so to do; be not only difficult of access on account of the distance, but was inhabited by numerous wild beasts, very fierce and savage, so as to render it very dangerous to attempt taking possession of it.
In process of time, however, some of his children, more stout and enterprising than the rest, requested leave of their father to go and settle in this distant country. Leave was readily obtained: but before they set out, certain articles were stipulated between them. The old gentleman engaged on his part to protect the adventurers in their new settlement; to assist them in chasing away the wild beasts; and to extend to them all the essential privileges and benefits of the government under which they were born: assuring them, that although they would be removed so far from his presence, they should always be considered as the children of his family. At the same time he gave each of them a bond for the faithful performance of these promises: in which it was moreover covenanted, that they should have the privilege of making such rules and regulations for the good government of their respective families as they should find most convenient: divided only, that these rules and regulations should not be contrary to, or inconsistent with, the general established orders of his household.
In return, he insisted that they, on their parts, should at all times and knowledge him to be there father; that they should not deal with others without his leave, but send to his shop for what they might want, and not sell the produce of their lands to any but those he should point out.
These preliminaries being duly adjusted, are adventurers bid adieu to the comforts and conveniences of their father's house. Many and great were the difficulties and dangers they encountered on the way; but many more, and much greater, on their arrival in the new country. There they found mountains covered with impervious forests, and plains steeped in stagnated waters  -  no friendly roof to shelter them from the roaring tempest  -  no fortress to protect them from surrounding dangers  -  many sunk under sickness and disease, and others fell a prey to the barbarous natives of the country.
They began, however, under all disadvantages to clear the land. The woods resound with the strokes of the ax  -  they drain the waters from the sedged morass, and poor the sun beams on the reeking soil. They are compelled to exert all the powers of industry and economy for bare subsistence; and, like their first parents, when driven from paradise, to earn their bread from the sweat of their brows. In this work they were frequently interrupted by the incursions of the savages, against whom they defended themselves with great magnanimity.
After some time, however, by their indefatigable perseverance they found themselves comfortably settled, and had the delightful prospect of fields waving with luxuriant harvests, and orchards, glowing with the fruits of their labour.
In the mean while they kept up a constant correspondence with their father's family; and provided, at a great expence, the means of procuring from his shop such goods and merchandizes as they wanted, for which they duly paid out of the produce of their lands, and the fruits of their industry.
CHAP. III.
Now the new settlers had adopted a mode of government in their several families similar to that to which they had been accustomed in their father's house: particularly in taking a new wife at the end of certain periods of time, without whose consent they could do nothing material in the conduct of their affairs. Under the circumstances, they thrived exceedingly, and became very numerous, living in great harmony with each other, and in constitutional obedience to their father's wife.
To protect them against the incursions of the barbarous natives, and the attacks of some of their neighbours, the old nobleman sent a number of his servants, but then he required that they should reimburse him for the trouble and expence he was at in furnishing this assistance; and this they cheerfully did, by applying from time to time to their respective wives for the necessary cash.
Thus did matters go on for a considerable time, to the mutual benefit of the old and new farms. But at last the nobleman's wife began to look with an avaricious eye towards the new settlers; saying to herself, if by the natural consequence of their friendly intercourse with us, and constitutional dependence on me our wealth and power are so much increased, how much more would they accumulate, if I can persuade them, that all they possess belonged originally to me, and that I may, in right of my prerogative, demand of them such portions of their earnings as I please. At the same time, being well aware of the promises and agreements her husband had made, and of the tenor and force of the Great Paper, she thought it best to proceed with great caution, and determine to gain her point, if possible, by subtile and imperceptible steps.
For this purpose, she first issued an edict, setting forth  -  That whereas the taylors of her family were greatly injured by the people of the new farm, inasmuch as they undertook to make their own clothes, whereby the said taylors were deprived of the benefits that should arise from their trade: it was ordained, that for the future, the new settlers should not be permitted to have any shears or scissors in their families, under severe penalties. In consequence of this, our adventurers were obliged to have their close made up by the taylors of the old farm, although they were well able to make them up themselves. Nevertheless, out of respect to the old gentleman, they patiently submitted to this imposition.
Observing also, that the new settlers were very fond of a kind of cyder, which they purchased off a person in friendship with her father (the fruit proper for making this cyder not growing on their own grounds), she issued another edict, obliging them to pay her a certain stipend on every barrel of this cyder used in their families  -  To this they likewise submitted; not yet seen the scope of her designs against them.
Thus she gradually preceded in her plan, imposing internal taxes on the new settlers, under various pretences, and receiving the fruits of their toil with both hands: moreover she persuaded her husband to send amongst them, from time to time, a number of the most lazy and worthless of his servants, under the specious pretext of defending them in their settlements; but, in fact, to raid his house of their company, not having employment for them at home: and more especially to be a watch and a check upon the people of the new farm. He had also ordered that these protectors, as they were called, should be supplied by the new settlers with bread-and-butter, cut in a particular form. But the head of one of the families, refused to comply with this whimsical order. He engaged to give the guests, thus forced upon him, bread-and-butter sufficient, but insisted that his wife should cut it in what shape she pleased. This put the old nobleman in a violent passion, insomuch that he had his son's wife put into jail, for presuming to cut her own loaf according to her own mind.
CHAP. IV.
As the old noblemen advanced in years, he neglected the affairs of his family; leaving them chiefly to the management of his steward. Now the steward had actually debauched his wife, and gained an entire ascendancy over her. She no longer deliberated upon measures that might best promote the prosperity of the old farm or the new; but said and did whatever the steward put into her head. Nay, so entirely was she under his influence, that she could not utter even aye or no but as he direct at her. For he had cunningly persuaded her, that it was very fashionable for women of quality to wear padlocks on their lips; and he accordingly fastened a small padlock to each corner of her mouth: when the one was open she could only cry aye; and when the other was unlocked she could only say no. And he took care to keep the keys of these padlocks in his own pocket; so that her words were the expressions of his will rather than of her own.
Now the old lady and the steward had set themselves strenuously against the people of the new farm; and began to devise ways and means for their total and unconditional subjection. And to this end they prevailed on the nobleman to sign an edict against the new settlers; in which it was declared, that, as children, it was their duty to contribute toward supplying their father's table with provisions, and towards the support of the dignity of his family; for which purposes it was ordained, that all their spoons, knives and forks, plates and porringers, should be marked with a certain mark by officers he should appoint for the purpose; for which marketing they should pay certain fees into his strongbox: and it was ordained, that they should not, under severe penalties, presume to use any spoon, knife, fork, plate or porringer before it had been so marked by the officer, and the fees paid.
The inhabitants of the new farm began now to see that their father's affections were alienated from them; and that their mother was but a base mother-in-law, governed by their enemy the steward. They were thrown into great confusion and distress by this discovery. They wrote the most supplicating letters to their father; in which they knowledge their dependence upon him in terms of the most sincere affection and respect. They reminded him of the difficulties and hardships they had suffered in settling this new farm; and pointed out the great addition of wealth and power his family had acquired by their improvement of an unprofitable wilderness; and showed him that all the fruits of their labour must, by natural circulation, finally enrich his money-box. They mentioned, in terms of humility, his promises and engagements to them when they left home, and the bonds he had given them; and held up in a strong point of view, the solemnity and importance of the Great Paper. They acknowledged that he ought to be re-imbursed the expenses he had incurred upon their account; and that it was their duty to assist in supporting the dignity of the family. All this they declared they were willing and ready to do; but requested that they might do it in the matter pointed out by the Great Paper; by applying to their respective wives for the keys of their money-boxes, and furnishing him from thence: but earnestly prayed that they might not be subjected to the caprice and tyranny of an average this mother-in-law, whom they had never chosen, and of the steward, who was there declared enemy.
Some of these letters were intercepted by the steward; others indeed were delivered to the nobleman: but he was persuaded not only to treat them with contempt, but to insist the more strenuously on the right his wife claim to marked the knives and forks, plates and porringers, of the new settlers.
When the people of the new farm heard of the ill success of their letters, and understood how matters were conducted in their father's family they were exceedingly alarmed and distressed. They consulted together under situation of affairs, and determined that they would no longer submit to the arbitrary impositions of their mother-in-law, and of their enemies the steward; that they considered the new decree as a direct violation of the Great Paper; and would not pay obedience to it, but would sup their broth and eat their putting as usual, without having their spoons, knives and forks, plates or porringers, marked by the new officers.
The old nobleman and his wife, finding that the new decree could not be established without actual force, and fearing the consequences of an open contest, thought fit to annul the offensive edict, under the pretense of mere expediency; declaring and protesting, at the same time, that he and his wife had an undoubted right to mark all the furniture of the new settlers, if they please, from the silver tankard in the closet to the chamber-pot under the bed: that, with respect to them, he was not bound by the shackles of the Great Paper; and in a word, that he and wife had, and ought to have, and uncontroled power over them, their lives, liberties, and property.
The people, however, took little notice of these pompous declarations. They were glad that the marking decree was annulled; and were in hopes that by degrees things would settle in their former course, and mutual affection be again restored.
CHAP. V.
In the mean time the new settlers encreased exceedingly, their dealings at their father's shop became proportionably enlarged, and their partiality for their brethren of the old farm was sincere and manifest. They suffered, indeed, some inconveniences from the protectors which had been stationed amongst them, who became very troublesome in their houses. They introduced riot and intemperance into their families, debauched their daughters, and derided the orders they had made for their own good government. Moreover, the old nobleman had, at different times, sent over to them a great number of thieves, murderers, and robbers, who did much mischief by practicing those crimes for which they had been banished from the old farm. But they bore those evils with as much patience as could be expected; not chusing to trouble their old father with complaints, unless in cases of important necessity.
Now the steward began to hate the new settlers with exceeding great hatred, and determined to renew his attack upon their peace and happiness. He artfully insinuated to the nobleman and his foolish wife, that it was very mean, and I'm becoming their greatness, to receive the contributions of the people of the new farm through the consent of their respective wives: that upon this footing they might some time or other refuse to comply with his requisitions, if they should take into their heads to think them oppressive and unreasonable; and that it was high time they should be compelled two egg knowledge is unlimited power and his wife's omnipotence, which, if not enforced now, they would soon be able to resist, as they were daily encreasing in numbers and strength.
Another decree was, therefore, prepared and published, directing that the people of the new farm should pay a certain stipend upon particular goods, which they were not allowed to purchase any where but at their father's shop; specifying that this imposition should not be laid as an advance upon the original price of these goods, but should be paid as a tax on their arrival in the new farm; for the express purpose of supporting the dignity of the nobleman's family, and for re-imbursing the expenses he pretended to have been at on their account.
This new decree occasioned great uneasiness. The people saw plainly that the steward and their mother-in-law were determined to enslave and ruin them. They again consulted together, and wrote, as before, the most dutiful and persuasive letters to their father  -  but to no purpose  -  a deaf ear was turned against all their remonstrances, and their humble requests rejected with contempt.
Finding that this moderate indecent conduct brought them no relief, they had recourse to another expedient: they bound themselves to each other in a solemn engagement, not to deal any more at their father's shop, until this unconstitutional to create should be repealed, which they one and all declared to be a direct violation of the Great Paper.
This agreement was so strictly observed, then in a few months the clerks and apprentices in the old gentleman's shop began to raise a terrible outcry. They declared, that their master's trade was declining exceedingly, and that his wife and steward would buy their mischievous machinations ruin the whole farm. They sharpen their pens, and attacked the steward, and even the old lady herself, with great severity: insomuch, that it was thought proper to withdraw this attempt also, upon the rights and liberties of the new settlers. One part only of the decree was left still in force, viz. the tax upon water-gruel.
Now there were certain men in the old farm, who had obtained an exclusive right of selling water-gruel. Vast quantities of the school were invented amongst the new settlers, as they were extremely fond of it, and used it universally in their families. They did not, however, trouble themselves much about the tax on water-gruel; they were well pleased with the repeal of the other parts of the decree, and fond as they were of this gruel, they considered it as not absolutely necessary to the comfort of life, and determine to give up the use of it in their families, and so avoid the effects of that part of the decree.
The steward found his designs again frustrated: but was not discouraged by the disappointment. He devised another scheme, so artfully contrived, that he thought himself sure of success. He sent for the persons who had the sole right of vending water-gruel; and after reminding them of the obligations they were under to the nobleman and his wife for the exclusive privilege they enjoyed, he requested that they would send sundry wagons laden with gruel to the new farm; promising that the accustomed duty which they paid for their exclusive right should be taken off from all the gruel they should so send amongst the new settlers; and that encase their cargoes should come to any damage, the law should be made good to them out of his master's coffers.
The gruel-merchants readily consented to this proposal; considering that if their cargoes were sold, their profits would be very great; and if they failed, the steward was to pay the damage. On the other hand, the steward hoped that the new settlers would not be able to resist the temptation, thus thrown in their way, of purchasing their favourite gruel, to which they had been so long accustomed; and if they did use it, subject to the tax after said, he would consider this as a voluntary acknowledgment that the nobleman and his wife had a right to lay upon them what impositions they pleased, and as a resignation of the privileges of the Great Paper.
But the new settlers were well aware of this decoy. They so plainly that the gruel was not sent for their accommodation; and that if they suffered a part of it to be sold amongst them, subject to the tax imposed by the new decree, it would be considered as a willing submission to the assumed omnipotence of their mother-in-law, and a precedent for future unlimited impositions. Some, therefore, would not permit the waggons to the unladen at all; but sent them back untouched to the gruel-merchants; and others suffered them to unload, but would not touch the dangerous commodity; so that it laid neglected about the roads and high-ways till it was quite spoiled. But one of the new settlers, whose name was JACK, either from a keener sense of the injuries intended, or from the necessity of his situation, which was such that he could not send back the gruel, because of a number of mercenaries whom his father had stationed in his house to be a watch over him  -  he, I say, being almost driven to despair, stove to pieces the casks of gruel which had been sent him, and utterly destroyed the whole cargo.
CHAP. VI.
These violent proceedings were soon known at the old farm. Great was the uproar there. The old nobleman fell into a furious passion, declaring that the new settlers meant to throw off all dependence upon him, and rebel against his authority. His wife also tour the padlocks from her lips, and raised and stormed like a Billingsgate, and the steward lost all patience and moderation  -  swearing most profanely, that he would leave no stone unturned, till he had humbled the settlers of the new farm at his feet, and cause their father to tread upon their necks. Moreover, the gruel-merchants Ward and bellowed for the loss of their gruel; and the clerks and apprentices were in the utmost consternation lest the people of the new farm should again agree to have no dealings with their father's shop.
Vengeance was fourth with prepared, especially against Jack. With him they determine to begin; hoping that by making a severe example of him, they should so terrify the other families, that they would all submit to the power of the steward and a knowledge the omnipotence of the great Madam.
A very large padlock was sent over to be fastened on Jack's great gate; the key of which was given to the old nobleman, who was not to suffer it to be opened until Jack head paid for the gruel he had spilt, and resigned all claim to the privileges of the Great Paper -  nor even then, unless he should think fit. Secondly, a decree was made to new model the regulations and economy of Jack's family, in such manner that they might in future be more subjected to the will of the steward. And, thirdly, a large gallows was erected before the mansion-house in the old farm, that if any of Jack's children should be suspected of misbehavior, they should not be convicted or acquitted by the voice of their brethren, according to the purport of the Great Paper, but he tied neck in heels, and sent over to be hanged on this gallows.
On hearing of these severities, the people were highly enraged. They were at a loss how to act, or by what means they should avoid the threatened vengeance. But the old lady in the steward persisted. The great padlock was fastened on Jack's gate, and the key given to the nobleman as had been determined on; without waiting to know whether Jack would pay for the gruel, or allowing him an opportunity to make any apology or defence.
Poor Jack was now in a deplorable condition indeed: The great inlet to his farm was entirely shut up; so that he could neither carry out the produce of his land for sale, nor receive from abroad the necessaries for his family.
But this was not all  -  The old nobleman, along with the padlock aforesaid, had sent an overseer to hector and domineer are over Jack and his family, and to endeavor to break his spirits by every possible severity; for which purpose, this overseer was attended by a great number of mercenaries, and armed with more than common authorities.
When the overseer first arrived in Jack's family, he was received with great respect, because he was the delegate of their aged father. For, notwithstanding all that had past, the people of the new farm loved and revered the old nobleman was true filial affection: and attributed his unkindness entirely to the intrigues of the steward.
But this fair weather did not last long. The new overseer took the first opportunity to show that he had no intention of living in harmony and friendship with the family  -  Some of Jack's domestics had put on their Sunday clothes, and waited on the overseer in the great parlour, to pay him their compliments on his arrival; and to request his assistance in reconciling their father to them, and restoring peace and cordiality between the old and new farms. But he, in a most abrupt and rude manner, stopped them short in the midst of their address; called them a parcel of disobedience scoundrels; bid them go about their business; and turning round on his heel, left the room with an air of contempt and disdain.
CHAP. VII.
The people of the new farm feeling the importance of their situation, had appointed a grand committee, consisting of some of the most respectable characters from each family, to manage their affairs in this difficult crisis. Jack, thus oppressed and insulted, requested the advice of the grand committee as to his conduct. This committee in their answer, sympathize cordially with him in his afflictions  -  they exhorted him to bear his suffering with fortitude for time; assuring him, that they looked upon the insults and punishments inflicted on him with the same indignation as if they had been inflicted on themselves; and promised to stand by and support him to the last  -  They recommended it to him to be firm and steady in the cause of liberty and their just rights, and never to it knowledge the omnipotence of their mother-in-law, nor submit to the machinations of their enemy the steward.
In the meantime, lest Jack's family should suffer for want of necessaries, his great gate being fast locked, contributions were raised for his relief amongst the other families, and handed to him over the garden wall.
The new overseer still persisted in his hostile behavior, taking every opportunity to mortify an insult Jack and his family  -  observing that some of the children and domestics held frequent meetings and consultations together, sometimes in the garret, and sometimes in the stable, and understanding that an agreement not to deal with their father's shop, until their grievances should be redressed, was again talked of, he wrote a thundering prohibition, much like a pope's bull, which he cause to be pasted up in every room of the house  -  In which he declared and protested, that such meetings were treasonable, traitorous, and rebellious, contrary to the dignity of his master, the nobleman, and inconsistent with the duty they owed to his omnipotent wife: and threatened that if two of the family should be found whispering together, they should be sent over in chains to the old farm, and hanged upon the great gallows before the mansion-house.
These harsh and unconstitutional proceedings of the overseer, so highly irritated Jack, and the other families of the new farm, that *****.
Cetera desunt.
