A PROPHECY
Written in 1776

Now it shall come to pass in the latter days, that a new people shall rise up in a far country, and they shall increase exceedingly, and many shall flock unto them; and they shall build cities in the wilderness, and cultivate their lands with a hand of industry, and the same of them shall spread far and near.
And it shall be that the king of islands shall send over and plant in the midst of them a certain tree. Its blossoms shall be delightful to the eye; its fruit pleasant to the taste, and its leaves shall heal them of all manner of diseases. And the people shall cultivate the street with all possible care, and they shall live under the shadow of its branches, and shall worship it as a God.
But in process of time, there shall arise a North wind, and shall blast the tree, so that shall no longer yield its fruit, or afford shelter to the people, but it shall become rotten at the heart; and the North wind will break the branches thereof, and they shall fall upon the heads of the people, and wound many.
Then a prophet shall arise from amongst this people, and he shall exhort them, and instruct them in all manner of wisdom, and many shall believe in him; and he shall wear spectacles upon his nose; and reverence and esteem shall rest upon his brow. And he will cry aloud, and say  -  Seeing that this tree hath no strength in it, and that it can no longer shelter us from the winds of the North, but is become rotten in the heart; behold now, let us cut it down and remove it from us: And in its place we will plant another tree, young and vigorous; and we will water it, and it shall grow, and spread its branches abroad. And moreover, we will build an high wall to defend it from the winds of the North: that it may be well with us, and our children, and our children's children.
And the people shall hearken to the voice of their prophet, for his sayings shall be good in their eyes. And they shall take up every man his spade and his ax, and shall prepare to dig up and cut away the shattered remains of the blasted and rotten tree, according to the words of their prophet.
Then a certain wise man shall arise, and shall call himself Cato; and he shall strive to persuade the people to put their trust in the rotten tree, and not to dig it up, or remove it from its place. And he shall harangue with great vehemence, and shall tell them that arrived tree is better than a sound one; and that it is for the benefit of the people that the North wind should blow upon it, and that the branches thereof should be broken and fall upon and crush them.
And he shall receive from the king of the islands, fetters of gold and chains of silver; and he shall have hopes of great reward if he will fasten them on the necks of the people, and chain them to the trunk of the rotten tree. And this he shall strive to do by every insinuating art in his power. And shall tell the people, that they are not fetters and chains, but shall be as bracelets of gold on their wrists, and rings of silver on their necks, two ornaments and decorate them and their children. In his words shall be sweet in the mouth, but very bitter in the belly.
Moreover, he will threaten them, that if they will not obey his voice, he will whistle with his lips, and raw-head and bloody-bones shall come out of France to devour them in their little ones; and he will blow with his sworn, and the wild bull of Spain will come and gore them with his horns, and trample upon them with his hoofs, even until they die. And he shall stand upon Mount-Seir, and shall pun upon Mount-Seir in the face of all the people. And all the people shall left him to scorn.
And it shall come to pass that certain other wise men shall also stand up and oppose themselves to Cato; and shall warn the people not to trust in the allurements of his voice, will be terrified with his threats, and to hearken to his ponds no more. And they shall encourage the people to go on with the work they had taken in hand, according to the words of their prophet. And they shall earnestly exhort the people to despise and reject the fetters of gold and the chains of silver, which the king of the islands would fasten upon them.
And one of these wise men shall call himself CASSANDRA, and the other shall call himself THE FORESTER: and they shall fall upon Cato, and shall strip him of every disguise, and shew him naked before all the people. And Cassandra shall tie him up, and the Forester shall scourge him until he shall become exceeding sore. Nevertheless, Cato shall not repent, but shall harden his heart, and become very stubborn, and shall be vexed till he die. And when he shall be dead, his funeral oration shall be pronounced. And the heads of the people shall order that his funeral or ration be printed; that all men may know of his death. Howbeit, in those days, it shall not be customary for the heads of the people to desire that funeral orations should be printed; yet that all men may know of Cato's death, and that the people may be delivered from the fear of the raw-head and bloody-bones of France, and the wild bull of Spain, his funeral oration shall be printed.
And in process of time, the people shall route up the rotten tree, and in its place they shall plant the young and vigourous tree, and shall if actually defended from the winds of the North by an high wall. And they shall dress it, and prune it, and cultivated to their own good liking. And the young tree shall grow and flourish and spread its branches far abroad: and the people shall dwell under the shadow of its branches, and shall become an exceeding great, powerful, and happy nation. And of their increase there shall be no end.
And Cato and his works shall be no more remembered amongst them. For Cato shall die, and his works shall follow him.
