A REVERY
I accidentally opened the 35[th] No. of the Guardian, were in a correspondent informs the Author, that some learned men have determined the pineal gland to be chief seat of the soul's residence, he had procured from a great philosopher a box of snuff, which had this remarkable property, that a pinch of it, duly administered, would so affect his pineal gland as to enable his soul to leave her residence for a while, and enter that of any other person; where she, in a moment, become acquainted with all the stranger's ideas, knowledge, and pursuits, by mere intuition.
After reading the paper, I closed the book, and reflecting on the singularity of the thought, I fell into one of those deep reveries in which the mind is entirely absorbed, and rendered for a while totally inattentive to the objects of the senses; forming a kind of waking dream.
I fancied myself possessed of some of this extraordinary snuff, and enabled thereby to examine a variety of characters, divested of all dissimulation. My heated imagination led me along chace through the intricate windings of the human heart. The rapidity of my progress made it impossible to delineate my observations on paper: four takes a great deal more time to write than to think. But I will try to recollect two or three of my excursions for your amusement.
After taking a view of many capricious characters, I entered the pineal gland of a miser. I've found his soul seated on her throne, with a large family of domestics around her: some weighting the orders of her will, and others executing her purposes with the utmost attention and assiduity.
"You see, (said she) with what industry I am laboring to fulfill the designs of our great Creator. You know that he has assigned us our respective little dominions here, that by a proper direction of the will, left free for that purpose, we may attain happiness. I cannot indeed say that I have as yet quite answered this benevolent end; but I am striving for it with all possible assiduity. I have, by unremitting care and attention, acquired a large portion of wealth, which would, I believe, make me very happy, were it not for two terrible apprehensions. One is, lest, by some unforeseen accident, I should be deprived of the fruit of my long labour; and the other is, lest an awful summons should remove me from this government, and compel me to leave all my hard-earned acquisitions behind. I endeavor to guard against the first of these evils by continually making such additions to my stock as to render it improbable that any one casualty should deprive me of the whole: and as the other is without remedy, I endeavor to think of it as little as possible."
I now took a view of her family, which I found in a deplorable condition indeed  -  and no wonder  -  since Avarice was prime minister, and had gained an entire ascendancy over the soul. I saw Honesty languishing under an incurable hectic: Conscience dying of her wounds: and Honour lay gasping for breath, and as cold as stone; all the noble passions were benumbed and frost-bitten; and as for Religion, she was close confined under a suspicion of disaffection to the present government, and of having formed a traitorous design to obstruct the Seoul in her pursuit of happiness. I inquired for Charity; but was told that she died in embryo: her body, however, had been preserved in spirit, and was shown to me as a great curiosity  -  Natural affection, sympathy, compassion, and all the social feelings were crawling about naked and almost starved to death. In the midst, sat the soul herself, sullen, fearful, and deeply anxious. She was neither closed with the robes of knowledge, nor decorated with the jewels of fancy. In vain did Memory strive to soothe her melancholy, by recounting the transactions of former times; and Hope, who should have song of joys to come, I got so bad a cold that she could not sing at all. Her palace was in no better condition than her family. The necessary repairs were refused or neglected  -  decorations it had done. Within and without it exhibited the appearances of extreme poverty. Numberless fine aqueducts were entirely dried up and in a ruinous condition: others were choked up with undigested crudity's, and the animal spirits were inspissated by long inactivity, and lazily crept through their rusty channels  -  Even the throne itself, the pineal gland, had shrunk into less than ordinary size; from whence it had been concluded, that the man had a little soul -  but erroneously, for, in fact, souls are of no size of all.
From this odious habitation I flew on the wings of thought to a character the very reverse. I entered the pineal gland of a Libertine. Here all was uproar and confusion: the soul seemed to have lost her command. Her unruly passions had rested the government from her hand, and tyrannized overheard domestics with unlimited sway: whilst the soul sat upon her throne in stupid amazement. Religion lay in a deep trance; Conscience was dozing under repeated anodynes; and the voice of Charity could not be heard in the tumult. Hope was wasting in a deep consumption; and Fear lay, with her throat cut, a ghastly sight, but as the wound was not mortal, she made frequent and dreadful struggles for life. Ambition was in a state of insanity, and played off thousand ridiculous gambols; Love lay groveling in the mire, with his wings clipt, and all his fine feathers sullied with mud and filth; and Honour had become so whimsical and captious, that she was perpetually embroiled in quarrels and disputes. As to the palace itself, it was so filled with combustibles that I expected every minute it would take fire and the entirely consumed. I left it there for as speedily as possible, and by an easy transition, tell myself in the pineal gland of a sot.
Here I found the soul sitting solitary on her throne, abridged of almost all her domestics, and divested of almost all her powers. She was afflicted with a deep and incurable lethargy, nearly approaching to absolute annihilation. She might have found some degree of satisfaction even in her insensibility, but that Truth, whose voice she could not silence, frequently reminded her, that the dissolution of her dominion was near at hand, when the domestics she had now dismissed would return, and become her perpetual tormentors. I observed, with great surprise, that she had lost much of the spirituality of her nature, and seemed to be condensed into an almost palpable and visible mass of matter. I scarcely knew her to be one of us  -  her habitation, for it could not be called the palace, was in a most alarming condition. An inundation, highly corrosive, had insinuated itself into every department, defiled the very seat of Majesty, and undermine the foundation of the building, so that it tottered on its base, and seemed just ready to fall in ruins.
Having gone thus far, I had an inclination to visit a body after the soul had left it. By an effort of imagination, I pierced the grave, and entered the pineal gland of a corpse newly interred. But description would here be highly disgusting. Every thing I saw inspired version and horror. The hissings of putrid fermentation  -  the cracking of the cordage, and the bursting of cataracts, sounded through the hollow fabric, and filled me with inconceivable terror and dismay. But what alarms me most, I perceive the gentle oscillation beginning in the heart, and felt myself constrained by a potent influence, like a person opprest with an Incubus. These symptoms were the effects of my presence, and fearing lest a connection should be formed, I broke the charm by a violent exertion, and with pleasure returned to my own body.
My efforts were assisted by the noise of a fife and drum which just been passed by my window, and raise me from this strange revery.

