The Ambiguity of the English Language.
I am by birth a foreigner, has been some years in the mercantile way, and by a successful attention to business have acquired a handsome fortune for a single man. Content with my acquisitions I closed all accounts, and resolved to travel, and settle wherever my inclination should determine. This city, for many reasons, became the place of my choice. I found it absolutely necessary to devote some time to the study of the English language; and for this purpose I purchased grammars, dictionaries, and some of the most approved authors in prose and verse; all which I studied with no small assiduity. I thought, at length, that I had made a considerable proficiency; but either I was deceived, or the language itself must be in the fault.
Precision in terms, is certainly an important perfection in any language: but, in this, the English tongue seems to be very deficient; witness the opportunity it affords to your demi -- witlings to quibble and pun upon every occasion; owing, as I apprehend, to the ambiguity of the language: many words having the same pronunciation, but widely differing in signification; and many of which are both pronounced and spelt precisely alike, are made to answer two very different ideas; hence the noble art of punning, to which the English are more addicted than any other nation.
This want of precision in the language may sometimes be productive of real inconveniences and serious mistakes, as I know by woeful experience. I will relate a few of the grievances I have suffered on this account; which may amuse you, but were, at the time they happened, truly vexatious to me.
Having a desire that my best room should be genteely furnished, I wrote to my correspondent in London for the purpose; and amongst other articles, requested him to send me a handsome pair of dogs, and half a dozen of the most fashionable chairs. He replied, that he had endeavored to comply with my orders. That the dogs he had shipped were of an excellent breed, and were thought to be very great beauties, and that he had sent me as handsome a sedan as could be made; apologizing that the other five could not be got ready in time for that conveyance, but should be forwarded as soon as completed. Judge of my disappointment when a pair of beagles came yelping up from the ship. Besides the first purchase, I had two guineas to pay for their passage, when I would not have given five shillings for their whole race. And then, to add my mortification, whilst I was unpacking my sedan chair, one of my witty neighbours observed, that I was determined to have a good cheer, let the world go as it would; and then making three loud huzzas, said there were three cheers more at my service. I wished the chair at the devil, and curse the language that was liable to so much ambiguity. I sold this chair for less than it cost me, and had just time to countermand the five others my correspondent was preparing to forward.
Having accidentally broke a lady's, I ordered my servant, the next morning to look for and purchase the best and handsomest fan he could get, and carry it to the lady with my compliments. My servant returned, after an absence of two hours, and told me that the lady refused to receive the fan; saying, that he must certainly be mistaken; that it could not be intended for her; that she had no use for such a thing. I was surprised, and ask my server and what he had done with it.  -  "Sir, I have brought it home with me."  -  "Well, and where is it?"  -  "At the door and a cart."  -  "In a cart!  -  a fan in a cart!"  -  I ran to the window, and saw a huge Dutch fan for winnowing corn.
At another time, I wanted to rack off some wine, and sent my blundering servant to buy a crane for the purpose. After a long stay, he came back and told me he could not find one in the whole market, but had bought a turkey worth half a dozen cranes; very wisely observing, that cranes were but poor eating. In like manner, when I once sent him to buy a goose, he brought home a taylor's iron goose for my dinner. There is no end to my vexations of this kind. Having an inclination to ride out, I ordered him to saddle and bridle the horse: but he came into me, sometime after, with the bridle in his hand, and with an embarrassed countenance declared he did not know how to put it on the horse. I called him a blockhead, when out to shew him how it should be done; when, behold, he had contrived to fasten my saddle on the wood-horse, and had been puzzling himself with the bridal, not knowing where to fix it. At last I got myself properly equipt; and intending to visit a friend a few miles out of town, I stopped a man on the road, and asked for directions to my friend's house. He told me that I must go on about a mile farther, and I should see a large house on the left hand, and must go in at a great gate. Accordingly, as soon as I came in sight of the house, I put spurs to my horse, and rode full gallop up to the door. The family were all greatly alarmed, as I had like to have ran over one of the children in my way, and they were, moreover, apprehensive of sudden bad news. I told him that I had only observe the direction that had been given to me, viz. to go in at a great gait; but they informed me, and that the gate at the end of the lane was meant, and not the gait of my horse.
One of my friends having bought a fine mare for me, I told my servant to go and fetch the mare. By and by comes the worshipful the mayor of the city to know what particular business I had with him. I was confounded with shame, and had 1000 apologies to make.
But it would be too tedious to recount all the blunders, mistakes, and crosses that have occurred to me a consequence of duplicity of the English tongue.
To render a language precise and determine it, every thing should have its proper name; which should differ from all other names as really as the thing to which it belongs differs from all other things. By applying the same appellation to different subjects, we are under the necessity of adding some explanatory word for the sake of distinction: which is not only a troublesome multiplication of words, but a clog to the language, and greatly diminishes its force and elegance. Thus, we are obliged to say, a bottle-crane, a wood-horse, a fire-engine, &c. &c. Would it not be much better if each thing had a name peculiar to itself, by which it might, in one word, be known and distinguished from all other things?
