Extraordinary Dream

To the Publisher of the Pennsylvania Magazine

SIR,

I was much pleased when I heard of your intention to publish a Magazine or Monthly Miscellany. For you must know, Mr. Aitken, that I have long had an earnest desire to appear as an author before the respectable public. When I walk out alone, which I frequently do, observations and sentiments arise in my mind, which appeared to me as wise and important as many of those which the press is continually intruding upon the public notice.
True it is, I have never yet been able to collect a sufficient number of these bright ideas to form a regular piece of composition: but I had great hopes, that if the proper occasion should offer, I might be able to furnish a short essay upon some subject or other.
You may wonder, perhaps, why I have not tried my hand in some of the public newspapers; but the truth is, that what would your Citizens, your Philadelphians, your Lovers of Liberty, your Moderate Men, and your Immoderate Men, there is no getting a word or two in, edge-ways, amongst them. Now, I look upon your proposed magazine as a pleasant little path, where a man may take an agreeable walk with a few orderly and agreeable friends, without the danger of being jostled to death in a crowd.
I determined, therefore, to make my appearance in your first number; and, for this purpose, I sat whole hours alone in my chamber: I took solitary walks, and implored every muse to assist me.  - But all in vain.- those hard-hearted goddesses were deaf to my earnest invocations, and absolutely refused to attend me, either in their better most suits of flowing rhyme, or in their common interests of home-spun prose.
The first important difficulty I met with was the choice of a subject; much fruitless time was wasted in this pursuit. The whole train of sciences passed in review before me; I chose, and rejected, my choice; I determined, and altered my determination; so many enticing objects courted my attention, that fancy hovered over them like a bird, undetermined where to settle.
Having, one evening, wearied myself with this mental exercise, I retired to rest. During the silent hours of night, when the powers of my soul, no longer subjected to the directions of my will, were resigned to the influences of the spiritual world, I was entertained with the following very
EXTRAORDINARY DREAM.
I found myself in a place where a thick fog surrounded me, and screened every object from my view. He exerted powers of vision could extend no farther than a few yards round me.
At length I perceived a dense and sutty cloud, gradually descend and rest before me. It attended its motions with earnest application. I observed that it boiled encircling eddies, and laboured with intestine conflict; it first with a peal of thunder, and vanished in thin air: I saw an angelic form of exquisite beauty standing before me. She was clad in flowing robes, white as the new fallen snow, and was invested with an atmosphere of lambent glory. She addressed me in words to this effect:
"happy art thou, O mortal! And highly favoured in this interview! I am TRUTH; and as thou art in the earnest pursuit of knowledge, I am come to impress upon thy mind, by sensible objects, a comprehensive view of human wisdom." Saying this, she waived her right hand, and the fog dispersed. I then perceived that I was standing on a beautiful eminence, which commanded an uninterrupted view of a very extensive garden. Three sides of this garden were bounded by a lofty and substantial wall; the fourth was washed by the waters of the ocean.
"What thou seest before thee, (said my divine companion,) is the garden of human knowledge. It is surrounded by a high wall, because the wisdom of finite beings must be finite; and it lies on the banks of the ocean of eternity. You may observe, that it has but one date, leading into a long and narrow path, On which nothing grows but a few nutritious fruits and salutary herbs. After this, innumerable walks and alleys branch out, directing to the several departments of the garden."
"I see your eyes are fixed upon that remarkable tree in the middle of the spacious garden. It does indeed make a very singular appearance now; but it was once the glory of the whole scene. It is the tree of religion, and its fruit is the most... And salutary that can be found in the whole garden. The folly of mankind hath reduced it to the deplorable situation in which you now see it. Some thought its branches were too large, and spread too far: and lest their shade should stint the growth of the paltry weeds they had planted under them, they lopt off many of them close to the stock. Others, on the contrary, concluded that, as it was so beneficial it's free, there could not be too much of it, and therefore permitted the suckers to grow round its roots; and moreover, brought cions from other trees and grafted them on the stock. Some learned botanists insisted that all the virtues of this tree were contained in the fruit, and would have all the leaves stripped off, as being of no use; whilst others, as learned, contended, that if the leaves were preserved, it signified nothing whether it bore fruit or not. Thus by their several systems and improvements, they would reduce it to a mutilated, useless, and deformed trunk."
"Turn your attention now to yonder labyrinth. That is the LAW department in the garden of knowledge. In the centre stands and elegant statue of Justice: but the ways that lead to it are so intricate, and the paths so narrow and interwoven with each other, but by the time those who reach it have got half through the puzzle, they become more anxious to find their way back then to proceed. For you must know, that the alleys are formed by stone walls and wooden fences stuck full with nails and tensor-books: so that, if the bold adventurer should even reach the statue, he gets there in a most ragged, and, sometimes, naked condition. Moreover, the entrances to all these past alleys were much encumbered with weeds, brush, and thorns; but a celebrated modern hath taken the pains to clear away a great deal of the rubbish, and has drawn a plan of the several windings and intricacies of this labyrinth for the benefit of mankind, yet the tensor-hooks remain in the walls as numerous as ever."
"Yonder large department is the district of PHYSIC. It abounds, indeed, with a great variety of medicinal herbs and plants; but the misfortune is, that the Ms. Application of their powers and qualities by unskillful pretenders, hath been the source of much misery to mankind. Add to this, that the affectation of pomp and mystery, and the fopperies a fashion, has to frequently rendered this important branch of knowledge ridiculous in the eye of truth."
"That secluded corner,
Dark with the cedar grove;
Where fragrant spices bloom,
And amorphous turtles love
Beneath the pleasing gloom,
Is devoted to the fine arts, PAINTING, POETRY, MUSIC, &c. It was once enriched with the great profusion of fruits and flowers of exquisite scent and varied hues: but these have long since been gathered by the artists of former days. It is kept, however, in need order, and furnishes many gay garlands and agreeable nosegays. It must be owned too, that a modern poet cultivated here a number of flowers and ever-greens, with uncommon success."
Here I interrupted my kind instructor, by asking, what that strange looking place, near the walls of the garden, might signify.
"That place, (said she) is a swamp, overgrown with briars and thorns. It is the department of LOGIC; in the most useless and untoward spot in the whole garden of knowledge. Nevertheless, there are not wanting some who take delight in cultivating it. You see what odd nooks and angles formed the outward boundaries; and the internal parts are also cut by thousand crooked paths, turning and winding, dividing and subdividing, and all to no purpose."
"The proprietors of the swamp have, in vain, and endeavoured to drain it, as it lies lower than all the neighboring ground. They have, however, somewhat improved it is shutting up the most useless paths, and throwing bridges and causeways over the marshy places. They have been pleased to dedicate their labours to me; but I should be sorry if any of my votaries should so far mispend their time, as to seek for me amidst the trifling intricacies of that barren place."
"near to the swamp you see METAPHYSICS; but this department lies so close to the wall which bounds all human knowledge, and is so shadowed thereby, that it produces very few plants whose virtues can be depended upon. The labourers in this ground are continually endeavouring to make keep-holes through the wall, by which they may discover the adjacent country: but the materials of which that wall is made are too hard to yield to any tools they can work with."
Here my divine instructor turned to me, and said: "I would willingly point out to you the situation and destination of all the other parts of the garden; but I perceive that by the natural course of your Constitution, your spirit will soon be again subject to your will, and of consequence plunged in the vortex of the busy world. I hasten, therefore, to communicate to use some very important intelligence, respecting both the spiritual and material kingdoms. Truths beyond the reach of human investigation, which will tend to enlarge her mind, and give you the most exalted ideas of the Omnipotent Author of nature."
"All that extensive part of the garden which is bounded by the ocean, is assigned for the several branches of NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. You may observe, that a great deal of it is beneficially cultivated, but much the greatest part of it remains yet unexplored. By the study of natural philosophy and astronomy men acquire some knowledge of the economy of the Great Supreme. In some instances demonstration in fact confirm the truths discovered; but, in others, fanciful hypotheses are substituted for truth, and errors become sanctified by system, and habitual by education. My present design is to remove some of these prejudices from your mind, and to enrich your understanding with true philosophy."
"Know, then, and observe it well, that"-at this instant, my servant not that my chamber-door, and told me that the barber waited for me. Think, Mr. Aitken, what a mortification it was to me to be so unreasonably interrupted, when I was just going to receive the secrets of nature from the lips of truth. Instead of conversing further with that divine personage, I was obliged to attend the impatience of Mons. le Friseur; who, without ceremony began to smear my face with nasty soap-suds. I heartily wished him in the ocean of eternity.
I must not forget, however, to tell you, that in a pleasant corner of the garden of knowledge, I saw a neat little fountain of simple architecture, from which issued several streams of pure water. On a handsome pediment in front of this fountain I saw inscribed THE PENNSYLVANIA MAGAZINE.
B.

