An Improved Plan of Education

There are few objects in life of greater importance than the proper culture and instruction of those who must in time supply the places of the present generation.
Very arduous is the task of education, both to the industrious teacher and his assiduous disciples. What thanks then will be due to him who shall contribute any thing towards rendering the road to science easy and pleasant, or shorten the tedious length of the journey.
Many schemes have been formed by ingenious men for this good purpose, in which they have endeavoured to blend the utile with the dulce, in so intimate a connection, that the pupil becomes insensibly instructed, whilst he thinks he is only amusing himself.
As I am quite disposed to allow every person the praise due to his ingenuity, I readily acknowledge the usefulness of their several devices: such as teaching geography by maps pasted on thin boards, and cut into pieces, according to the divisions of counties or kingdoms: commerce, by a te- to-tum: history and chronology, by a pack of cards: and Euclid's elements, by figures cut out of box-wood, with many other similar inventions, by which science is planted in the minds of youth by the fair hands of innocent pleasure.
The improvement I have made on this idea, appears to me so important, that I cannot for bear offering it to the public for general use; heartily recommending my plan to the trustees of our college, and to the patronage of the legislature. I have, herein, not only United instruction with delight, but added also the invaluable blessing of health; making these desirable acquisitions to go hand-in-hand, mutually improving and strengthening both mind and body, by one amusing process.
In order to execute my plan, it will be necessary to purchase about twenty acres of level ground, which must be well cleared of all incumbrances; and, if laid out in a circular form, it may be called the whole circle of sciences.
To begin with grammar, which cost the poor boys much trouble and painful attention: I beg leave to quote a passage from a late humorous novel; from which, I must injustice big knowledge, I took the hint of my improved plan of education. The passage I allude to is this.
"Here, Jackey, let the gentleman see you decline the pronoun article hic, hac, hoc. Master Jackey immediately began hopping about the room, repeating hic, hac, hoc; genitive, hujus, dative, huic; accusative, hunc, hac, hoc; vocative, caret; ablative, hic, hac, hoc. There now, says Selkirk, in this manner I teach him the whole grammar. I make eight boys represent the eight parts of speech. The noun substantive stands by himself; the adjective has another boy to support him; the nominative case carries a little wand before the verb; the accusative case walks after and supports his train; I let the four conjugations make a party at whist, and the three concords dance the hate together, and so on."
By this contrivance, the common exercise of hop-step and jump is rendered truly grammatical, and the head in the heels are improved by one operation.
In like manner, a the young scholar be instructed in arithmetic, by the healthful play of hop-scot; wherein certain squares are delineated on the ground, and each superscribed with numerical figures: the dexterity consists in hopping about on 1 foot, and kicking a piece of potsherd or oyster-shell into such squares as shall produce the greatest amount of figures.
It is easy to see that in such a commodious piece of ground the several branches of mathematics, as trigonometry, surveying, navigation, &c. may be acquired by actual exercise, in a mode very amusing to the student.
Natural philosophy may also be taught by the sports in common use amongst boys. The vis inertia of matter, elasticity, and the general laws of motion may be evidenced in playing marbles, fives, and bandy-wicket. The doctrine of projectiles, the accelerated velocity of falling bodies, and the parabolic curve, the centrifugal force, and the laws of gravitation, may be understood by shooting arrows, slinging stones, and throwing snow-balls. Pneumatics will be taught in the use of the pop-gun, flying of kites, blowing bladders, enlisting stones with a piece of wet leather and string: and hydrostatics may be illustrated by the squirt in other aquatic amusements.
A sufficient knowledge of logic may be acquired by the same helpful and entertaining means. Let a large boy represent the major proposition; a small boy in the minor; and a middle sized lad the conclusion: and let these three play at hide and seek. A sorites may be very aptly represented by thread my needle nan; and a dilemma by blind buck and Davy. Every species of syllogisms may be exemplified by devices of the like kind.
Thus far the common sports of boys may be made the vehicles of instruction; by some ingenuity on the part of the tutor will be requisite to teach them moral philosophy and astronomy. In order to the first, I would propose that the several passions and affections of the mind be represented by as many boys, each of whom should have his destined course and distance assigned by the tutor, who should himself represent reason. These boys should all be blindfolded, and started as for a race; and whilst they are running, helter-shelter, in full career, the tutor should exert himself with great vociferation to direct them to keep in their several courses: calling out to one to stop, to another to push forward, and to all of them not to jostle or interfere with each other. It would be proper that the stoutest and most active boys should personate the passions, and that the cooler affectionsof the mind should be assigned to the young, weak, and tardy. Large stumbling-blocks should also be placed at the end of the respective courses, which will probably break the shins of those who attempt to pass their limits, and will give some idea of the office of conscience: and it would be better still, if an impetuous disciple, blundering over his stumbling-block, should find himself entangled amongst briars and thorns, previously disposed for the purpose. The head-scholar should be seated on high as judge of the race, representing the understanding: in the strongest lad start the racers, emblematical of the will.
To teach astronomy, it will be necessary to make use of the whole twenty acres of ground: which must be divided by concentric circles, at proportional distances, for the orbits of the planets. But the tutor place himself as the son, in the centre: the larger boys representing the primary planets, and the small ones attending them as satellites. The tutor, by the help of a speaking trumpet, must direct them how to perform their several revolutions in due order of time and place; which cannot fail giving these peripatetic philosophers a competent idea of the solar system.
This is my proposed plan of education, and I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of seeing it put in practice.
What a glorious entertainment must be to see whole schoolboys practicing and actually performing their several exercises. Some hopping over a grammar lesson; stepping by mood intense, and jumping over nouns and pronouns, verbs and adverbs? If the young student should happen to lean too much on one side, he may be said to be declining; and if he should actually fall, he will probably be in the vocative. There is no lover of learning but must be delighted with such an exhibition.
As a proof of my own public spirit, I am determined to give a considerable part of the some which are legislature shall order me as the reward of my ingenuity, towards purchasing the aforesaid twenty acres of ground for the use of the college.
It may be objected, that this plan is CAC related for fair weather only; but I am now preparing for the press the completion of my scheme, by a variety of in-door exercises; wherein I shall shew, that laws and government may be taught by the play of break the friar's neck; trade and commerce, by I am a Spanish merchant; the occult sciences, by hide the slipper: and so on. But I will not buy anticipation lesson the pleasure my readers will have been pursuing the second part of education improved.


