On Adversity.
The least attention will satisfy the inquiring mind, that the present state of man is not final, but preparatory to a future existence; the happiness or misery of which will not be determined by the unalterable decree of the omnipotent Creator, but will more probably depend on the temper and capacity of the soul of each individual to become an angel of light, or a fiend of darkness. We cannot reasonably suppose that God will forcibly compel any man to be either happy or miserable. Good and evil are set before us, and our own wills must determine the choice. Such, indeed, are the infirmities of our nature, that without divine assistance we are unable to persevere in the paths of righteousness. This assistance, however, is graciously promised to those who sincerely desire it. To will, or not to will, to be good and happy is in our own power; but really to be so, is the gift of God. He doth indeed continually incite men to a happy choice by the various dispensations of his Providence: either by an accumulation of benefits, which ought to engage their love and gratitude; or by suffering them to experience the trials of adversity, that they may see the vanity of temporal enjoyments, and turn their views to more substantial happiness. It's so entirely free is man, that he too often suffers neither of these powerful inducements to influence his mind as they ought. The smiles of prosperity frequently producing arrogance, self-sufficiency, immorality, and excess: and the wholesome chastisements of an affectionate Father frequently creating murmurings and discontent.
In the early periods of life, our senses alone are the touch-stones of good and evil. Whatever is grateful and pleasant to them we denominate good; whatever is painful and uneasy common we denominate evil. This simple distinction is sufficient for the state of infancy, when the nurture and security of the body is the chief concern: but when the mind comes to be enlightened by reason and religion, it will easily perceive, that an undue attention to present enjoyments, or a misapplication of them, may be productive of much future misery; and that temporal crosses and afflictions fit the soul for eternal happiness and glory.
Human nature hath a strong abhorrence of pain, brief, and care. Were it otherwise they would be of no use in winning the affections from the vanities of the world. Most medicines are nauseous to the palate and severe in their operation. In this their virtue consists. Affliction is the medicine of the soul. It softens the obdurate heart, and renders it susceptible of good impressions. When we are in pain and sorrow, we learn to feel for the distress of others, and are prompted to acts of charity. When we find that the pleasures of the world cannot give solid, permanent satisfaction  -  cannot gratify all our desires, we are induced to turn to that only Being who is the source of true felicity, and in whom alone there is fullness of joy. In the time of distress we feel and know what we only had, perhaps, a transient idea of before, that the Christian graces and virtues are the only true source of happiness; and will be our comfort in the last inevitable hour: when all the palliating vanities of the world, and the anodynes of pleasure, must entirely lose their effect. The sensibilities attendant on affliction and distress, are too strong to be continued through the common course of life. The wounds of the mind will heal as well as those of the body. But if afflictions produce their proper effect, the mind, ever remembering that those things may be, will acquire a calm and steady adherence to the dictates of conscience and the practice of virtue: not as a talk imposed by a superior power whose wrath would deprecate; but as the highest gratification to himself. He will become habituated to do good; and what is duty in others will be nature in him.
Thus it is that the calamities of life may become real blessings, if a right use be made of them. If the smiles of prosperity do not fill the soul with gratitude, love, and religious joy; they will produce arrogance, self-sufficiency and pride: If pain, distress, and disappointment, the loss of those we love, and injuries from those who love not us, do not wean the heart from too strong an attachment to the transitory pleasures of life, and direct our views to better hopes; they will either plunge us in the giddy eddies of vicious enjoyments, to drown every painful sensibility, or will throw the mind into a wicked despondency, and occasion profane murmurings against the Author of our existence, or fix us in a gross and sinful infidelity.
I may, perhaps, in some parts of this paper, have left open the door for controversy. But I shall not enter the lists with any one. I would rather spend my time in the most on meeting amusements, and corrupt my heart with the pride and obstinacy of what is called religious disputation.
Placed, as we are, in transitory scene of probation; drawing nigher still and nigher, day by day, to that interesting crisis which must introduce us into a new system of things; ordered not to be our principal concern to use every means that may have a tendency to fit us for that heaven we hope to enjoy? This cannot be done by speculative opinions or ingenious theories; but by habituating the heart to devout sensibilities, and making that, rather than the head, the seat of virtue.
Dry and unfruitful reasonings, on the one hand, and the enthusiastic rambles of unbridled imaginations on the other, have been the sources of much error to mankind in religious matters. We are not all capable of understanding the causistical refinements of the book-learned, neither can we all follow the extravagant sallies of over-heated brains; but we all know, or may know, the unquestionable path of virtue. Let us pursue that path with unremitting diligence: performing the duties of our respective stations in life with a cheerful activity; enjoying the world without being waited to its follies, and prepared to leave it in the awful summons shall arrive.
