OF PRUDENCE
INTRODUCTION
To show what is truly great, ornamental, or useful, in life ; to call the attention of mankind to objects worthy of their regard, as rational and immortal beings; to give
a brief, but comprehensive account of the certain and established means for attaining the true end of our existence, happiness in the present and future states; is the design of the following essay. The motives which engaged the author to attempt a task, confessedly too arduous for any single hand, were such as to him seemed sufficient to justify his aspiring,
where even a failure, if not too shameful, must deserve praise; as encouragements from persons, for whom he joins with all mankind in having the most profound regard
and veneration ; the candour he has, in some more inconsiderable attempts, met with from the public; the hope of receiving improvement to himself from digesting and com-
piling such a work, and from the opinion of the judicious upon it: these several considerations had deservedly their respective influence. But what rendered the attempt
more proper and necessary, was a direct view to the advantage of some young persons, in other parts of the world, as well as England, with whom his connexions are such as to give them, a right to the fruit of his best abilities in the literary kind; and who will not probably fail to pay a peculiar regard to whatever comes from him. 
To exhibit a comprehensive idea of the true Dignity of Human Nature, it will be necessary to consider what is fit for a being, who at present inhabits a perishing
body, itself an immortal spirit; for a creature capable of action, of making himself and others happy in this world, and of being rewarded and punished hereafter according
to his conduct; for a nature fitted for social virtue, and brought into existence to be prepared for glory and happiness. 
It is necessary, in order to a man's filling properly his place in society, that he regulate his conduct by the laws of prudence and virtue. To answer the Divine intention in furnishing him with rational faculties, it is evidently proper, that he labour to improve those faculties with knowledge. And in order to his gaining the favour of the supreme Governor of the world, upon which alone the happiness of all created beings depends, it is plain, that obedience to his laws is indispensably necessary, which comprehends religion, natural and revealed. The Dignity of Human Nature may then be exhibited under
the four following heads, viz.
I. Prudence, or such a conduct with respect to secular affairs as is proper in itself, and suitable to respective circumstances, and naturally tends to make a man happy in himself, and useful in society.
II. Knowledge, or the improvement and enlargement of the faculties of the mind, as understanding, memory, and imagination.
III. Virtue, or a conformity of disposition and practice to rectitude in all respects, as to ourselves, our fellow-creatures, and our Maker.
IV. Revealed Religion, or a due inquiry into, and proper regard to, any express revelation which the Supreme Being may hate given to mankind.
The business of life is serious, not ludicrous. No order of beings (especially of rationals) was brought into existence wholly for pleasure and amusement; but to fill some useful place, and answer some important end in the extensive scheme of the beneficent Creator. It is therefore evidently the interest, the wisdom, and the perfection of every rational creature to look to it, that he perform properly the duty of his appointed station: and in that he will in the end find his glory and his happiness.
To give a brief view of what is principally necessary to the dignity of human nature, it seems most methodical to address the following directions chiefly to those readers
who have not yet gone far in life, but are at the same time arrived at an age capable of improving by proper helps and a due attention to their own interest, when faithfully
pointed out to them. Proceeding, from the first setting out in manly life, to the subjects of marriage and education of children, and to the conduct of more advanced age; all the stages of life may be taken in, and the true disunity of each pointed out.
That in the following essay there will of course be wanting a number of particulars, more or less conducive to the dignity of our nature, is no more than may be expected in a design so extensive. If it be found, that whoever conforms to these directions, and frames his character according to the following plan, will have attained the most considerable part of the perfection of human life; it will be acknowledged by the candid and ingenuous, that the throwing together into one view, such a number of particulars of principal importance, was attempting a service useful to the public.
   As young people have a prospect (though a precarious one) of living to old age, it is of consequence that they he early put upon such courses as will be likely to render their passage through life, whether longer or shorter, easy and comfortable. A person's setting out with proper dignity is of great importance toward his future prosperity; as, on the contrary, one false step at the first entrance into life may prove irretrievable. Mankind fix
their attention upon the behaviour of a person just setting out, and according to the prudence or want of judgment they observe in the first steps he takes, pronounce (too
precipitately indeed) upon the whole of his future conduct. Men, in active stations especially, ought to consider, that, at their first Entrance into life, they will have the ill-will and envy of many rivals and competitors to encounter ; and ought to remember, that it will require no ordinary degree of sagacity to defeat the designs of those who think themselves interested to make a bad use of every miscarriage.
To this end there is nothing so indispensably necessary as prudence, or a turn of mind which puts a person upon looking forward, and enables him to judge rightly of the
consequences of his behaviour; so as to avoid the misfortunes into which rashness precipitates many, and to gain the ends which a wise and a virtuous man ought to pursue.
It is evident to the meanest understanding, that there is a fitness or unfitness, a suitableness or unsuitableness, of things to one another, which is not to be changed, with-
out some change presupposed in the things, or their circumstances. Prudence is the knowledge and observance of this propriety of behaviour to times and circumstances,
and probable consequences, according to their several varieties.
A turn to prudence is, like all the other endowments of the mind, a natural gift, bestowed more or less liberally upon different persons. Some give promises of sagacity and coolness of judgment almost from their infancy; and others never arrive at the mature exercise of foresight or reflection; but, in spite of the experience of many years,
seem children to the last. At the same time, this faculty is capable of great improvements in almost the weakest heads, could they but be brought to bestow a little
thought and attention, and to listen to reason more than to passion.
Imprudent conduct may be owing to a person's want of opportunity for knowing the propriety of behaviour, which is the case of young and unexperienced persons, who have
not been long enough in the world to know it; and of rustics, academics, and recluses, who, though they have lived long enough, have not lived among mankind so as to ac-
quire a due knowledge of them.
Imprudence is also often owing to some unhappy turn of mind, which gives a cast to people's behaviour contrary to their better knowledge. Of this kind are false modesty,
indolence, and propensities to particular follies and vices. Rashness is a great enemy to prudence. The natural vivacity and warmth of youth, and of people of sanguine tempers, makes this folly very conspicuous in them. It is remarkable, that in most points of decorum, the female sex have the advantage of us. This cannot be owing either to any difference in natural abilities, or to greater experience or knowledge of the world; but to the natural timidity of their tempers, joined with the delicacy of their education, which prevents their behaving in the forward and precipitate manner we often do, to the disparagement of our prudence, and the disappointment of our designs.
The prejudices occasioned by evil habits, and by pride, and passion, contribute greatly to the blinding of human reason, and misleading men into imprudent conduct. Of which in their respective places. To give one's self up to he led by popular prejudice is as likely a way to be misled as any I know. The multitude judge almost constantly wrong on all subjects that lie in the least out of the common way. They follow one another like a flock of sheep; and not only go wrong themselves, but make those who are wiser ashamed to go right. And yet it is not prudent to be singular in matters of inferior consequence.
That a genius inferior only to a Shakspeare or a Milton, should not be able to keep a coat to his back; to save himself from starving amidst his poetic fire, at the same time
that an honest citizen whose utmost reach of thought only enables him to fix a reasonable profit upon a piece of linen or silk, according to its first cost and charges, should, from
nothing, raise himself to a coach and six: to account for what in theory seems so strange, it is to be considered, of what consequence it is towards a proper behaviour, that
a person apply a due attention to all the minute circumstances, and seemingly inconsiderable particulars, in the conduct of life. Let a man have what sublime abilitiea
he will, if he is above applying his understanding to find out, and his attention to pursue any scheme of life, it is as little to be expected that he should acquire the fortune of
the thriving citizen, as that the plain shopkeeper, who never applied his mind to learning, should equal him in science. There is no natural incompatibility between wit or learning, and prudence. Nor is the man of learning or genius, who is void of common prudence, to be considered in any other character than that of a wrong-headed pedant, or of a man of narrow and defective abilities.
Prudence may, in general, be divided into two parts.:
first, that which regards conversation. And, secondly, that which serves to regulate action. As to our words, we are to consider, first, whether what we are going to say had better be spoke or kept in. And the only time for considering this, is before we speak: for
it may be too late afterwards. Whatever may prove to the disadvantage of the speaker, the hearers, or of any absent person, is m prudence carefully to be suppressed. Of the first sort, is, whatever may prejudice the speaker, as, by exposing him to prosecution, by discovering his secrets, or, by getting him ill-will. Of the second, is whatever may
tend to debauch the virtue of the hearers, or, by affronting, work them up to anger and misbehaviour. And of the third, whatever tends to derogate from the character of
any absent person. To treat of these without regard to order:
There is no imprudence more common or universal than that of detraction. I speak of it at present only as an imprudence, reserving the immorality of that practice to another occasion. And what can be more imprudent, than upon the mention of an absent person, with whom I am no way concerned, to break out into invectives and severities which may bring me into disputes and trouble, but can answer no good end?
Did men but consider what opinion the judicious form of those they see delight in detraction, they would, for their own sakes, avoid a practice which exposes them to
the contempt of all humane and considerate people. He who takes pleasure in speaking to the disadvantage of others, must appear to all wise men, either in the light of an envious person, who can brook nothing eminent m another, of one whose mean abilities and improvements will furnish no better entertainment for those he converses with,
than disadvantageous representations of others; or of one who partakes of the temper of an evil spirit, and delights in mischief for mischiefs sake. And no man can think it
will tend to the forwarding of his interest among his neighbours, to procure himself any of these characters. The mischiefs a person may bring upon himself, by evilspeaking, either by exposing himself to legal penalties, or to private resentment, and general hatred, are so great, that prudence will direct to speak of every man, as one would do if he knew the person, whose character is mentioned, was in the next room, overhearing all that
passed. For one can never be sure that he shall not be called upon to say the same things before the person's face which he has taken the liberty of saying behind his back. And who would be put to the trouble of proving, or to the confusion of recanting his words?
Nor is it enough that what we say to an absent person's disadvantage be but trifling, or of no great consequence in itself; since what is said in conversation lies wholly at
the mercy of the hearers to represent it as they please; and the mere repetition of what has been said without thought or design, makes it appear of consequence. It is
evident, therefore, that in touching upon what is so extremely delicate as the characters of others, there is no safe method but taking the good-natured side, (where any thing can be said in vindication,) or, if the character spoke of is wholly indefensible, total silence; neither of which is liable to misconstruction.
As to putting the easy and credulous upon their guard against the artful and designing, the usual pretence for obloquy; it may be done without hazard, and without injustice, by anonymous letters, in a disguised hand, to the persons we think in danger of being imposed upon, or in any other prudent way ; taking care still to treat the character of others with the same tenderness as one would wish his own to meet with. It will ever be the wisdom of every person, not only to avoid the odious practice of evilspeaking; but to make a resolution to have no concern with those who are given to it. If I find a person takes a pleasure in misrepresenting others to me, I ought to conclude he will use my character in the same manner in the next company he goes for.

A WISE man will ever be cautious of venting singular opinions in science, in politics, and above all, in religion, where he does not perfectly know his company. He will
consider, that he' has ten chances for startling or displeasing his hearers, for one of informing or setting them right in a single conversation; the bulk of mankind being
much too fond of their own opinions and prejudices to desire to come at truth with the hazard of being obliged to give up their beloved maxims. A man of prudence is always modest in delivering his sentiments, even where he is absolutely certain that he is
in the right, and that his opponent is totally ignorant of the subject in dispute. For he considers that it is happiness enough to know himself to be in the right, and that
he is not obliged to battle the narrowness and perverseness of mankind.
It is likewise proper to remember, that, in a dispute, the by-standers generally take it for granted, that he who keeps his temper is in the right, and that what puts the
other out of humour, is his finding himself in danger of being worsted. A prudent person will carefully avoid touching upon the natural infirmity, whether of body or mind, of those he is in company with. The exposing a person's imperfections to the observation of others can answer no end but irritating. We find it hard enough to prevail with
mankind to look into their deficiencies themselves; but to set a whole company a gazing at them, is what they will never bear at our hands. When there is a friendly hint to be given for correcting some failing, if it be done in private, or by an anonymous letter, it may answer the end; whereas, the rude exposing of a person's weakness makes him think himself obliged in honour to defend, and consequently to hold fast his error.
A wise man will despise the conceited pleasure some people take in what they call speaking their mind, that is, in expressing their dislike of those they fall into company with, in a blunt and rude manner, without the least necessity or prospect of advantage, and with the certainty of affronting and disobliging. For he will consider, that though he may chance not to like the make of every face he meets in the street, or the humour of every person he falls in company with, he cannot expect either the one or the other should be altered immediately upon his expressing his dissatisfaction, and may expect to have
his rude remarks retaliated upon him with interest. As nothing is more provoking to some tempers than raillery, a prudent person will not always be satirically witty where he can; but only where he may without offence. For he will consider that the finest stroke of raillery is but a witticism: and that there is hardly any person so mean, whose good-will is not preferable to the pleasure of a horselaugh. If you should by raillery make another ridiculous, (which is more than you can promise upon,) remember that the judicious part of the company will not think the better of you for your having a knack at drollery or
ribaldry. Before you set up for a satirical wit, be sure that you are properly furnished. If you be found to be a bad archer, they will set you up for a butt.
In the case of one's being exposed to the mirth of a company for something said or done sillily, the most effectual way of turning the edge of their ridicule, is by joining the laugh against one's self, and exposing and aggravating his own folly; for this will show that he has the uncommon understanding to see his own fault.

As to his own private affairs, a prudent person will consider, that his secrets will always be safer in his own breast, than in that of the best and discreetest friend he has in the world. He will therefore be very cautious of imparting them; and will never let any one into the knowledge of them, but for the sake of profiting by his advice for some other useful end. There is not indeed a person among many hundreds to whom a secret is not an unsupportable burden. And the bulk of people are so extremely curious, that they will fall upon a thousand stratagems to make the person, who they imagine is possessed of a secret, believe that they know most of it already, in order to draw him on to discover the whole: in which they often succeed.
A prudent person will always avoid diving into the secrets of others; for he will consider, that whoever is weak enough to blab his private affairs to him, is like to put the
same confidence in others; the consequence of which may be, that he may come to be blamed for what was discovered by the indiscretion of another, though religiously concealed by himself. If you cannot keep your own secrets, how do you think other people should? If you have such an opinion of a person as to think he will be faithful to you, he has the like of another, and he again of another, and so your secret goes round. You ought likewise to consider, that besides the chance of unfaithfulness in him to whom you trust a secret, or of a difference arising between you, the mere circumstance of his happening some time or other to forget himself, may be the occasion of his discovering and undoing you.
As to the choice of friends or companions, the number of which ought to be small, and the choice delicate, one general rule may be laid down, viz. That a man who has neither knowledge nor virtue, is by no means a fit companion, let him have what other accomplishments he will. No advantage one can propose from keeping the company of an ignorant or a wicked man, can make up for the nuisance and disgust his folly will give; much less for the danger of having one's manners corrupted, and his mind debauched. Nothing can give a higher delight than the conversation of a man of knowledge. There is,
in a mind improved by study, conversation, and travel, a kind of inexhaustible fund of entertainment, from which one may draw supplies for many years enjoyment, and at
every conversation receive some new piece of information and element. On the contrary, the company of an ignorant person must soon grow tiresome and insipid. For one will soon have heard all the tolerable things he can say: and then there is an end of improvement and entertainment both at once.
As for your buffoons, who are the delight of superficial people, and the fiddles of companies, they are, generally speaking, the most despicable people one can converse
with. Their being caressed by the thoughtless part of mankind, on account of their pleasantry, gives their manners such a tincture of levity and foolery, that very few of
them are good for any thing but to laugh at. And as a very extensive vein of wit is a great rarity, you will generally find the drolls you meet in company have a set of conceits which they play off at all times, like dancing hogs, or monkeys; and that what chiefly diverts, is rather some odd cast of countenance, or uncommon command of features, than any thing of real wit that will bear repeating.
The only proper persons, therefore, to choose for intimate friends, are men of a serious turn; for such are generally prudent, and fit to consult with ; and of established characters: for such, having somewhat to lose, will be cautious of their behaviour. To which add another qualification, indispensably necessary in a friend, with whom one would expect to live agreeably; I mean, a good natural temper. Nothing more forcibly warms the mind to a love of goodness, or raises it more powerfully to all that is truly great and worthy, than the conversation of wise and virtuous mend.  There is a force in what is said viva voce, which nothing in writing can come up to. A grave remonstrance, mixed with humanity and compassion, will often awaken thought and reflection in a mind which has stood proof against the finest moral lessons in books. And the approbation of a friend, whose judgment and sincerity one esteems, will encourage one to go lengths in every commendable disposition and practice, which he could not have thought himself capable of. As, on the contrary, a little smart raillery, or a smooth flow of words, put together with an appearance of reason, and delivered with an easy and assured air, may very quickly shake the virtue, or unhinge the principles, of a young person who has neither had time nor opportunity for establishing himself sufficiently. I do not mean, that young persons are to take upon trust all that is told them by pious people (some of whom may be very weak and bigotted) without examining into the grounds and evidences of what they have taught them, and without allowing themselves an opportunity of hearing both sides of the question. This is more than religion requires; nay, it is directly contrary to what it requires: for it directs men to use their own reason, and not to take any thing of importance upon trust. Nor can any thing be more unsafe than to trust that to another
which I ought to make sure of for myself; which is my own concern infinitely more than any one's else, and where, I alone must stand to the damage. My meaning, I say,
is not to discourage young people from hearing all sides, and conversing among people of different ways of thinking; but to guard them against the crafty and the vicious, from whose conversation they will be sure to gain nothing, and may lose dreadfully.
As the slightest touch will defile a clean garment, which is not to be cleaned again without a great deal of trouble, so the conversation of the wicked and debauched,
will, in a very short time defile the mind of an innocent person, in a manner that will give him great trouble to recover his former purity. You may therefore more safely venture into company with a person infected with the plague, than with a vicious man; for the worst consequence of the first is death; but the last, the hazard of a worse destruction. For vicious people generally have a peculiar ambition to draw in the innocent to their party;
and many of them arc furnished with artifices and allurements but too effectual for insnaring. It is the advice of a great man to his son, to keep the company of his superiors rather than his inferiors. This direction is to be followed with discretion. As on one
hand, for a gentleman to associate constantly with mechanics, must prove the most effectual means of sinking him to the level of their manners and conversation ; so
on the other, for a young person, who is born to no great fortune, and must resolve to make his way in life by his own industry, to affect the company of the nobility and
gentry, is the way to have his mind tinctured with the same love of idleness and expense, which even in people of fortune is highly blameable; but in these, who have no such prospects in life, is certain ruin. The supposed advantage arising from the friendship of the great, is of very little consequence. The surest way to ingratiate one's self with the bulk of them is to serve their pleasures, or their ambitious views: A price infinitely
too great for all that their favour can procure. It may therefore, I think, be concluded, that the most proper companions for every man, are those of his own rank in life.
It has been the misfortune of many in friendship, as in love, to form to themselves such romantic notions, of I know not what sublimities, as will not answer in real life, and to make themselves miserable upon meeting with disappointments. Whoever thinks to find an object of love or friendship, in whom after long acquaintance and familiarity, nothing faulty or defective shall appear, must go among superior orders of beings in search of what he wants: human nature will furnish no such characters. He who has found a friend, capable of keeping a secret, of giving sincere and judicious advice, of entertaining and instructing by his conversation, and ready to show his affection by actions as well as words; he who has found such a friend, and drops Mm for any weakness not inconsistent with these qualities, shows himself unworthy of such inestimable treasure. As a temper too reserved and suspicious, forbidding the approach of a stranger, is an indication of a crafty disposition, or at least of a timorous and narrow mind; so throwing open one's arms to every forward intruder, is a proof of egregious want of prudence and knowledge
of the world. Those pert and insinuating people, who become, all of a sudden, and without any reason, the most zealous and sanguine friends, are ever to be suspected of some indirect design. The wisdom of behavior therefore is, to communicate your knowledge to all who seem willing to receive it; your private affairs only to persons of approved secrecy and judgment, and to them no more than is absolutely necessary; to have many acquaintance, but few intimates; to open your countenance to all, your heart to very few. Never think of friendship with a covetous man: He loves his money better than his friend. Nor with a man of pleasure : He has not gravity enough to render his
conversation improving. Nor with a wicked man: He will corrupt you. Nor with a silly fellow : His emptiness will disgust you. Nor with a drunkard: He will betray your secrets. A passionate fellow will affront you. A conceited man will expect you to submit to him in every thing. A mean-spirited creature will disgrace you. A bully will draw you into his quarrels. A spendthrift will borrow your money. A very poor fellow will make your
life unhappy. A man of overgrown fortune will draw you into his expensive way of living. There is no folly more common among young people than that of puffing or boasting; at which some are extremely awkward, putting their accounts of their pretended feats together in a manner so inconsistent and contradictory, that their hearers never fail to detect them for mere fictions.
Some will be ever ascribing to themselves witty sayings, which they have heard in company, or perhaps read in books. Some will pretend to have performed things,
which if they be challenged to do again, they are obliged to own they cannot. Many, who have never had opportunity or capacity for study, endeavour to persuade those that converse with them, that they have gone through the whole circle of the sciences, and will pretend to have read every book you can name. Others will be stunning all companies with the great acquaintance they have, and talking of intimacies with eminent persons, whom perhaps in truth they hardly know by sight. And others are guilty of this vice to a degree still incomparably more wicked; I mean, those who delight in blasting the characters of ladies, whose favours they boast, when they have never been so much as in their company. This infamous practice has cost some of these vain and wicked
boasters all they were worth. The most effectual means I know, for avoiding of getting rid of this foolish habit of boasting, is, to accustom one's self to speak as little as possible in the first person. The figure of egotism is one of the most ungraceful that can enter into any man's conversation or writings, though it is to be met with in some of .the most eminent both of ancient and modern times. But if it gives a man a disadvantageous appearance to be himself the historian of the actions he has really done, what a contemptible light must he appear in, who, in order to set himself off, has recourse to falsehood. To what a degree of baseness must that mind he sunk, which can descend so low as to invent a lie. We see a sense of honour upon this point, oftenfPmains in the mind, when every thing else that relishes of virtue is gone. The town-rake, who will make no hesitation at murder or adultery, will yet take the imputation of a lie, whether just or
unjust, for an affront not to be expiated, but with blood. For he looks on other crimes as venial, or perhaps as acts of heroism; but falsehood is universally owned to imply in it a peculiar degree of mean-spiritedness. Nor will any man allow himself in this base practice, who considers (Abstracting from the vice) the gross imprudence of exposing himself to the universal contempt which always falls upon the character of a liar, who of course loses the confidence of mankind, even when he speaks truth.
If one has given any just cause of disobligation, the proper part to act, is, frankly to own the offence, and ask the injured person's pardon; and it must only be from excessive pride and obstinacy that one will refuse what is so reasonable. And how much more manly is such behaviour, than to have recourse to the base subterfuge of a lie, or equivocal evasion! Falsehood is indeed, on all accounts, inexcusable, and can never proceed but from some unworthy principle, as cowardice, malice, or a total contempt of virtue and honour. And the difficulties it runs one into are not to be numbered. One lie requires ten others to support it. And the failure of probability in one of them, ruins all.
The pains necessary to patch up a plausible story, and the tacking of the memory to keep always to the same circumstances in representing things, so as to avoid contradictions, is insufferable. And after all, it is a thousand in one but the artifice is detected; and then the unhappy man is questioned as much when he is sincere, as when he dissembles; so that he finds himself at a full stop, and can neither gain his ends with mankind by truth nor
falsehood. As it is common and natural for young gentlemen to court the company of the ladies, it is proper to give them some directions upon that subject. It is certain, that the elegancy of behaviour, and that universally engaging accomplishment of complaisance,
are no where to be learned but in the conversation of that delicate part of our species. And it is likewise certain, that in the company of ladies there is less to be met with that is likely either to shock, or to corrupt an innocent person, that in the conversation of even the tolerable sober part of our sex. But as on the other hand, it must be confessed, that their being deprived of the advantages we have for enlarging our knowledge, renders their conversation less improving, it must be allowed, that to spend the bulk of one's leisure time in their company is not to be justified ; nor indeed do they expect it, but on the contrary, heartily despise the effeminate tribe of danglers. A prudent man will therefore only seek the conversation of the ladies occasionally ; and, where he does, he will not enter wholly into their manner, but will, by easy and engaging ways, endeavour to draw them into conversation that may be more entertaining to himself, and more in proving to them, than the usual chit-chat of the lea-table. For is a man in any hazard of giving disgust by this proceeding, unless his manner of introducing such subjects
be somewhat affected, or gloomy, or overbearing. On the contrary, the more sensible part of the sex always expect to hear from us something different from, and superior to the superficial stuff, of fashions, love affairs, and remarks on neighbours; and entertain but contemptible notions of a man who is furnished with no better topics than these. There are many of that sex, who have made so good use of the mean advantages we allow them for improving themselves, that their judgment will be found preferable to that of many men, on prudentials and morals; (whence they do not pretend to ;) but these are chiefly
such as have had the advantage of experience and conversation. The usual trash of compliment and flattery, with which that contemptible order of mortals, commonly called fops, are wont to entertain the ladies, is equally shameful to those who utter, and those who receive it. And none but the most superficial part of the sex are to be imposed upon by it; nor can any thing show a man in a more ridiculous light, than to be convicted of attempting to flatter, without sufficient address to conceal his design. The whole of it is mean and disingenuous, and unworthy of the open plainness and sincerity so graceful in
our sex. At the same time, as the ladies are but little accustomed to hear the plain truth, much less disagreeable truths, a man of prudence will avoid contradicting or blaming them too bluntly, knowing, that by such behaviour there is nothing to be got but their ill-will. Toying or romping with handsome women, however distant it may be from any direct design upon them, being yet unsuitable to the delicacy of genteel behaviour, and tending naturally to promote levity, if not to excite irregular desires in young minds, is what I would wish wholly discouraged.
As there is no accomplishment more agreeable in a companion, when people want to relax, than a nack at telling a story ; there is no part of conversation, in which men expose themselves more egregiously. The entertainment and instruction which companies receive from a well told story, of which history and lives furnish the best materials, naturally make people desirous of being thought to possess a talent so agreeable. And those whom nature has not fitted out with the proper abilities, cannot miss to execute what they undertake in an awkward manner. The chief of .the errors in telling a story, are the following, viz. Tediousness, in dwelling upon insignificant. Circumstances, which do not interest the company. And, on the other hand, curtailing too much, and leaving out such circumstances as tend to characterize the persons in the story, or are otherwise essential. Overrunning the proper conclusion or catastrophe of the narration. Over-acting the humorous or lively parts; or drawling on the narration in an unanimated manner. ^B?
The most witty and facetious companion in the world may make himself as thoroughly disagreeable as the most insipid mortal that can go into company. Let such a one labour to be witty, and strain for fine things. Let him stun the company with noise and forward impertinence; or let him show a contempt for them by a sullen silence; and he shall be as heartily despised as ever he was admired.
I do not think it would be easy to invent a sillier custom than that which universally prevails at present, of visiting where there is no real regard or esteem. There is no keeping up a correspondence of this kind withoutbeing guilty of infinite dissimulation. And they must set politeness at a high rate indeed, who will give up integrity for it.
But to consider this matter only in a prudential light, which is the business at present, I should be glad to know wherein appears the wisdom of throwing away time
(which one may always apply in some manner agreeable to one's self) upon people, whom one heartily despises.
Where interest obliges people in business to show civility to their customers, or those they have connexions with in life, there is some pretence of necessity for keeping up such a commerce. But why people in high and independent stations should think it necessary to spend so many hours in visits, to themselves insipid and disagreeable, is to me wholly inconceivable. When there are so many noble employments, and elegant amusements to fill up the time of people of figure, it grieves one to see them make themselves useless to their country, and unhappy in themselves, by wasting their hours in the slavery of disagreeable visits, and the endless drudgery of the card-table. To see people of rank descend to such low foolery as visiting those whom they hate or despise; denying themselves by their servants, when they are really it home, to avoid the visits of those themselves have invited, making pretended visits to those they know to be abroad, and even sending their empty coaches to perform a mock ceremonies; to observe all this hypocritical carried on by people of high rank, how does it degrade them in the eyes of their inferiors!

One may lay down the following as a maxim which will never fail, viz. That so long as his conversation is entertaining, and behaviour affable and modest, he will be sure to be treated with respect, though his discourse he quite sober and chaste. Swearing and obscenity are offences not only against all that is sacred, but against all that is polite. They are sins without temptation, without alleviation, and without
reward. Swearing is an affront to all sober and well-behaved people. It confounds and interrupts, instead of gracing conversation; as the continual repetition of any
set of unmeaning words, from time to time, necessarily must.
As for obscenity, every one knows it must shock and startle every modest ear. It gives no real pleasure; but on the contrary, if it has any effect, must excite and irritate the passions, without gratifying them, which is pain and torment. If obscenity is fit conversation only for public shews, it cannot be proper among genteel people; and no person deserves the appellation of a gentleman, who accustoms himself to the behaviour of whoremasters and
prostitutes. For it is manners, and not dress, that form that character. If the definition of true good manners be, That behaviour which makes a man easy in himself, and easy to all
about him; it can never be good manners to be troublesome by an excess of ceremony, by overpressing to cat or drink, or by forcing a favour of any kind upon those we converse with. Nor can it be said to be consistent with good behaviour, to overdo the complimenting part, so as to border upon insipid flattery; nor does politeness by
any means require that we exceed our inclination, or cross our particular taste, in eating and drinking what may be pressed upon us, to our own disgust; much less than 
prejudice of our health or temperance.
No one can be long at a loss, as to behaviour, who observes the following directions, and is in earnest resolved to regulate his conduct upon them, viz. first, That the way to be generally agreeable in conversation, is to show that one has less at heart the humouring his own inclinations, than those of the company, and that he is not so full of himself as to overlook or despise others; and, secondly, That the grace of behaviour is to be learned only from the imitation of the judicious and polite. But care must be taken that your imitation be not so slavish as to strip you of your natural character and behaviour, and disguise you in those of another, which, being assumed, and artificial, will not become you. For nature in russet is more agreeable than affectation in embroidery. There is nothing that costs less, and gains more friends, than an affable and courteous behaviour. One may always observe, that those who have been accustomed to the best company behave with the greatest freedom and good nature. People of figure and real worth, having reason to expect that others will treat them with suitable respect, do not find it necessary to assume any airs of superiority. Whereas, the vain and conceited, who fancy no submission whatever, is equal to their dignity, are ever endeavouring, by a haughty carriage, to keep up that respect in others, which their want of real merit cannot. But bow
ill they succeed, is easy to observe, from the universal contempt and disgust such a behaviour meets with among all judicious people.
The truth of the matter is, that the differences between one person and another are, in respect to every circumstance, but that of virtue, so very inconsiderable, as to render any insolent superiority on the one hand, or mean submission on the other, extremely ridiculous; since, according to the elegant expression of Scripture, " Man is
but a worm, and the son of man a worm." Nothing shows a greater abjectness of spirit than an overbearing temper, appearing in a person's behaviour to inferiors. To insult or abuse those who dare not answer again, is as sure a mark of cowardice, as it would be to
attack with a drawn sword a woman or a child. And wherever you see a person given to insult his inferiors, you may assure yourself he will creep to his superiors; for the same baseness of mind will lead him to act the part of a bully to those who cannot resist, and of a coward to those who can. But though servants and other dependants may not have it in their power to retort, in the same style, the injurious usage they received from their superiors, they are sure to be even with them by the contempt they themselves have for them, and the character they spread abroad of them through the world. Upon the whole, the proper behaviour to inferiors is, to treat them with generosity and humanity; but by no means with familiarity on one hand, or insolence on the other. And if a fiery temper and passionate behaviour are improper to inferiors, they are more so among equals, for
this obvious reason, That the only effect of a choleric behaviour on your equals, as exposing you to the ridicule of those who have no dependence upon you, and have neither hopes nor fears from you. There is indeed no greater happiness than an even natural temper, neither liable to be extremely eager and sanguine, nor stoically indifferent and insensible; neither apt to be worked up to a tempest with every trifle, nor yet buried in a continual lethargic stupidity; neither delighting in being always engaged in scenes of mirth and frolic, nor to be wrapped in the impenetrable gloom of a fixed melancholy. And after all, what is there in life that may be justly reckoned of sufficient importance to move" a person to a violent passion? What good grounds can there be for great expectations, for gloomy apprehensions, for immoderate triumph, or for deep dejection, in such a state as the present, in which we are sure of meeting with innumerable disappointments, even in the greatest success of our affairs, and in which we know that our afflictions and our pleasures must both be soon over ? True wisdom will direct us to study moderation with respect to all worldly thing: to indulge mirth but seldom, excessive grief never; but to keep up constantly an even cheerfulness of temper.
If it should happen through inadvertency, passion, or human frailty, that you expose yourself to be taken to task by any one, do not so much labour to justify the action, (for that is doubling the fault,) as your intention, which might be harmless. Besides, the action appears manifest to every one; so that people will judge for themselves, and not take your notion of it. But your intention, being known only to yourself, they will more readily allow you to be the most proper person to explain it. Above all, it is base and unjust to palliate your own fault by laying the blame upon others.
Suppose you should fairly own you was in the wrong. It will be only confessing yourself a human creature. And is that so mortifying! If, on the contrary, you should stand it out, people will think you twice in the wrong -- in committing a folly, and in persisting in it. 
It is generally pride and passion that engage people in quarrels and law-suits. It is the very character of a good man, that he will, upon occasion, recede from the utmost
rigour of what he might, injustice, demand. If this character were a common one, there would be few law-suits; which, whoever loves, I heartily wish him, for his instruction, the full enjoyment of all its peculiar delights, as attendance, expense, waste of time, fear, and wrangling, with the hatred of all who know his character, and the diminution of his fortune by every suit he engages in. If you have reason to believe that your enemy has quitted his hatred to yon, and his ill designs against you, do not insist upon his making you a formal speech, acknowledging his fault and asking pardon; but forgive him frankly, without putting him to the; pain of doing what may be more disagreeable to him than you can imagine: For men's natures are very different. If you already know that he is favourably disposed to you, you cannot know it better by his tilling you so in a formal manner. At the same time, it is not necessary that you trust yourself any
more in the hands of one who has endeavoured to betray and ruin you. Christian forbearance and forgiveness are no way inconsistent with prudence.
There is no circumstance in life top trivial to be wholly unworthy of the regard of a person who would be generally agreeable, on which a man's usefulness in society depends much more than many people are aware of. It is a great pity that many persons, eminently valuable for learning and piety, do not study the decorum of dress and behaviour more than they do. There is incomparably greater good to be gained by humouring mankind in a few of their trifling customs, and thereby winning their good will, than by startling or disgusting them by a singularity of behaviour in matters of no consequence. In dress, I would advise to keep the middle between foppery and shabbiness; neither being the first nor the last in a fashion. Every tiling which shows what is commonly called a taste in dress, is a proof of a vain and silly turn of mind, and
never fails to prejudice the judicious against the wearer. A discreet and well-behaved person will never fail to meet with due respect from all the discerning part of society,
(and the good opinion of the rest is not worth desiring,) though his dress be ever so plain, so it be decent.

As order or method are of very little consequence in treating of such subjects, I will add here a set of miscellaneous thoughts upon the art of conversation, couched in a few words, from which, with what has been already observed, the young reader may furnish himself with a competent knowledge of what is to be studied, and what to be avoided in conversation. If the reader should find the same thought twice, it is hoped his candour will overlook a fault not easy to be avoided in putting together such a variety of unconnected matter. There are few of the following sentences that will not furnish a good deal of thought, or that are to be understood to their full extent without some consideration. He who knows the world will not be too bashful. He who knows himself will not be impudent. Do not endeavour to shine in all companies. Leave room for your hearers to imagine something within you beyond all you have said. And remember, the more you are praised, the more you will he envied. If you would add a lustre to all your accomplishments, study a modest hehaviour. To excel in any thing valuable is great; but to be above coneeit, on account of one's accomplishments, is greater. Consider, if you have rich natural gifts, you owe them to the Divine bounty. If you have improved your understanding, and studied virtue, you have only done your duty. And thus there seem
little ground left for vanity. You need not tell all the truth, unless to those who have
a right to know it all. Hut let all you tell be truth. Insult not another for his want of a talent you possess: He may have others which you want. Praise your friends, and let your friends praise you. If you treat your inferiors with familiarity, expect the
same from them.
If you give a jest, take one.
Let all your jokes be truly jokes. Jesting sometimes ends in sad earnest.
If a favour is asked of you, grant it if you can. If not, refuse in such a manner as that one denial may be sufficient.
Wit without humanity degenerates into bitterness. Learning without prudence into pedantry. In the midst of mirth, reflect that many of your fellow creatures round the world are expiring; and that your turn will come shortly. So will you keep your life uniform and free from excess.
Love our fellow creature, though vicious. Hate vice in the friend you love the most.
Whether is the laugher or the morose the most disagreeable companion?
Reproof is a medicine like mercury or opium; if it be improperly administered it will do harm instead of good. Nothing is more unmannerly than to reflect on any man's profession, sect, or natural infirmity. He who stirs up against himself another's self-love, provokes the strongest passion in human nature. Be careful of your word, even in keeping the most trifling appointment. But do not blame another for a failure of that kind till you have heard his excuse. Never offer advice but where there is some probability of its being followed. If a great person has omitted rewarding your services, do not talk of it; perhaps he may not yet have had an opportunity, for they have always on hand expectants
innumerable, and the clamorous are too generally gratified before the deserving; besides, it is the way to draw his displeasure upon you, which can do you no good, but make bad worse. If the services you did were voluntary, you ought not to expect any return, because you made a present of them unasked; and a free gift is not to be turned into a loan, to draw the person you have served into debt. If you have served a great person merely with
a view to self-interest, perhaps he is aware of that, and rewards you accordingly : nor can you justly complain: he owes you nothing; it was not him you meant to serve.
Fools pretend to foretell what will be the issue of things, and are laughed at for their awkward conjectures. Wise men being aware of the uncertainty of human affairs,
and having observed how small a matter often produces a great change, are modest in their conjectures. He who talks too fast, outruns his hearer's thoughts. He who speaks too slow, gives his hearer pain by hindering his thoughts, as a rider who frets his horse by reining him too much. Never think to entertain people with what lies out of
their way, be it ever so curious in its kind. Who would think of regaling a circle of ladies with the beauties of Homer's Greek, or a company of country squires with
Sir Isaac Newton's discoveries? Never fish for praise; it is not worth the bait.
Do well, but do not boast of it; for that will lessen the commendation you might otherwise have deserved. He who is guilty of flattery, declares himself to be sunk
from every noble and manly sentiment, and shows that he thinks the person he presumes upon void of modesty and discernment. Though flattery is so common in courts, it
is the very insolence of rudeness. To offer advice to an angry man, is like blowing against
a tempest. Too much preciseness and solemnity in pronouncing what one says in common conversation, as if one was preaching, is generally taken for an indication of self-Conceit. Make your company a rarity, and people will value it. Men despise what they can easily have. Value truth, however you come by it. Who would not pick up a jewel that lay on a dunghill? The beauty of behaviour consists in the manner more
than the matter of your discourse. If your superior treats you with familiarity, it will not
therefore become you to treat him in the same manner. Men of many words are generally men of many puffs. A good way to avoid impertinent and pumping inquiries, is by answering with another question; an evasion may also serve the purpose : but a he is inexcusable on any occasion, especially when used to conceal the truth
from one who has no authority to demand it. To reprove with success, the following circumstances are necessary, viz. mildness, secrecy, intimacy, and the esteem of the person you would reprove. If you be nettled with severe raillery, take care never
to show that you are stung, unless you choose to provoke more. The way to avoid being made a butt, is not to set up for an archer. To set up for a general critic, is bullying mankind. Reflect upon the different appearances things make to you from what they did some years ago; and do not imagine that your opinion will never alter because you are
positive at present: let the remembrance of your past changes of sentiment make you more flexible. If ever you was in a passion did you not find reason afterwards to be sorry for it? And will you again allow yourself to be guilty of a weakness which will certainly
be in the same manner followed by repentance, besides being attended with pain?
Never argue with any but men of sense and temper. It is ill manners to trouble people with talking too much either of yourself or your affairs. If you are full of yourself, consider that you and your affairs, are not so interesting to other people as to you.
Keep silence, sometimes, upon subjects which you are known to be a judge of: so your silence, where you are ignorant, will not discover you. Some ladies will forgive silliness, but none ill manners; and there are but few capable of judging of your learning or genius; but all of your behaviour. Do not judge by a view of one person or thing. Think like the wise, but talk like ordinary people; never go out of the common road but for somewhat.
Do not dispute against facts well established, merely because there is somewhat unaccountable in them. That the world should be created of nothing, is to us inconceivable ; but not therefore to be doubted. There is no occasion to trample upon the meanest reptile, nor to sneak to the greatest prince. Insolence and baseness are equally unmanly. As you are going to a party of mirth, think of the hazard you run of misbehaving; while you are engaged do not wholly forget yourself; and after all is over, reflect how you have behaved; if well, be thankful, it is more than you could have promised; if otherwise, be more careful for the future. Do not sit dumb in company ; it will be ascribed either to pride, cunning, or stupidity: give your opinion modestly, but freely; hear that of others with candour; and ever endeavour to find out, and to communicate truth. If you have seen a man misbehave once, do not from thence conclude him a fool; if you find he has been in a mistake in one particular, do not at once conclude him void of understanding : by that way of judging, you can entertain a favourable opinion of no man upon earth, nor even of yourself. In mixed company, be readier to hear than to speak, and put people upon talking of what is in their own way; for then you will both oblige them, and be most likely to improve by their conversation. Humanity will direct to be particularly cautious of treating with the least appearance of neglect, those who have lately met with misfortunes, and are sunk in life; such persons are apt to think themselves slighted when no such thing is intended. Their minds, being already sore, feel the least rub very severely; and who would be so cruel as to add affliction to the afflicted? Too much company is worse than none. To smother the generosity of those who have obliged you, is imprudent, as well as ungrateful: the mention of kindnesses received may excite those who hear it to deserve your good word, by imitating the example which they see does others so much honour. Learning is like bank-notes : prudence and good behaviour are like silver, useful upon all occasions. If you have been once in company with an idle person, it is enough; you need never go again; you have heard all he knows; and he has had no opportunity of learning any thing new; for idle people make no improvements. Deep learning will make you acceptable to the learned ; but it is only an obliging and easy behaviour, and entertaining conversation, that will make you agreeable to all companies. Men repent speaking ten times, for once that they repent keeping silence. It is an advantage to have concealed one's opinion; for by that means you may change your judgment of things (which every wise man finds reason to do) and not be accused of fickleness. There is hardly any bodily blemish which a winning
behaviour will not conceal, or make tolerable; and there is no external grace which ill nature or affectation will not deform.
If you mean to make your side of the argument appear plausible, do not prejudice the people against what you think truth by your passionate manner of defending it. There is an affected humility more unsufferable than downright pride, as hypocrisy is more abominable than libertinism. Take care that your virtues be genuine and unsophisticated.
If you put on a proud carriage, people will want to know what there is in you to be proud of: it is ten to one whether they value your accomplishments at the same rate you do. And the higher you aspire, the more desirous will they be to mortify you. Nothing is more nauseous than apparent self-sufficiency; for it shows the company two things which are extremely disagreeable ; that you have a high opinion of yourself; and, that you have comparatively a mean opinion of them. It is the concurrence of passions that produces a storm. Let an angry man alone, and he will cool of himself. It is but seldom that very remarkable occurrences fall out in life. The evenness of your temper will be in most
danger of being troubled by trifles which take you by surprise.
It is as obliging in company, especially of superiors, to listen attentively, as to talk entertainingly. Do not thing of knocking out another person's brains, because he differs in opinion from you; it will be as rational to knock yourself on the head because you differ
from what you thought ten years ago. If you want to gain any man's good opinion, take particular care how you behave the first time you are in company with him; the light you appear in at first, to one who is neither inclinable to think well nor ill of you, will
strongly prejudice him either for or against you. Good humour is the only shield to keep off the darts of the satirical railer: if you have a quiver well stored, and are sure of hitting him between the joints of the harness, do not spare .him; but you had better not bend your bow than miss your aim.
The modest man is seldom the object of envy. In the company of ladies do not labour to establish learned points by long-winded arguments; they do not care to take much pains about finding out truth. Talkativeness, in some men, proceeds from what is extremely amiable, I mean, an open, communicative temper; nor is it an universal rule, that whoever talks much must say a great deal not worth hearing; I have known men who talked freely, because they had a great deal to say, and delighted in communicating for their own advantage, and that of the company; and I have known others, who commonly sat dumb, because they could find nothing to say. In England we blame every one who talks freely, let his conversation be ever so entertaining and improving; in France they look upon every man as a gloomy mortal whose tongue docs not make an uninterrupted noise:
both these judgments are unjust. If you talk sentences, do not at the same time give yourself a magisterial air in doing it. An easy conversation is the only agreeable one, especially in mixed company. Be sure of the fact before you lose time in searching
for a cause. If you have a friend that will reprove your faults and foibles, consider you enjoy a blessing which the king upon the throne cannot have.In disputes upon moral or scientific points, ever let your aim be to come at truth, not to conquer your opponent: so you never shall be at a loss in losing the argument, and gaining a new discovery. What may be very entertaining in company with ignorant people may be tiresome to those who know more ofthe matter.
There is no method more likely to cure passion and rashness, than the frequent and attentive consideration of one's own weaknesses: this will work into the mind an
habitual sense of the need one has of being pardoned, and will bring down the swelling pride and obstinacy of heart, which are the cause of hasty passion.
If you happen into company where the talk runs into party, obscenity, scandal, folly, or vice of any kind, you had better pass for morose or unsocial, among people whose good opinion is not worth having, than shock your own conscience by joining in conversation which you must disapprove of.
If you would have a right to account of things from illiterate people, let them tell their story in their own way; if you put them upon talking according to logical rules, you will confound them. I was much pleased with the saying of a gentleman who was engaged in a friendly argument with another upon a point in morals. "You and I (says he to his antagonist) seem, as far as I hitherto understand, to differ considerably in our opinions; let us, if you please, try wherein we can agree." The scheme in most disputes is to try who shall conquer or confound the other; it is therefore no wonder that so little light is struck out in conversation, where a candid inquiry after truth is often the least thing thought of. If a man complains to you of his wife, a woman of her husband, a parent of a child, or a child of a parent, be very cautious how you meddle between such near relations, to blame the behaviour of one to the other; you will only have the hatred of both parties, and do no good with either: but this does not hinder your giving both
parties, or either, your best advice in a prudent manner. Be prudently secret; but do not affect to make a secret of what all the world may know; nor give yourself airs of being as close as a conspirator; you will better disappoint idle curiosity by seeming to have nothing to conceal. Never blame a friend without joining some commendation to make reproof go down.
It is by giving a loose to folly, in conversation and action, that people expose themselves to contempt and ridicule. The modest man may deprive himself of some part of the applause of some sort of people in conversation, by not shining altogether so much as he might have done; or he may deprive himself of some lesser advantages in life by his reluctancy in putting himself forward; but it is only the rash and impetuous talker, or actor, that effectually exposes himself in company, or ruins himself in life: it is therefore easy to determine which is the safest side to err on. It is a base temper in mankind, that they will not take the smallest slight at the band of those who have done them the greatest kindness. If you fall into the greatest company, in a natural and unforced way, look upon yourself as one of them; and do not sneak, nor suffer any one to treat you unworthy, with-
out just showing that you know behaviour; but if you see them disposed to be rude, overbearing, or purse-proud, it will be more decent and less troublesome to retire, than to wrangle with them. If at any time you chance, in conversation, to get on the
ride of an argument which you find not to be tenable, or any other way overshoot yourself, turn off the subject in as easy and good humoured a way as you can: if you proceed still, and endeavour, right or wrong, to make your first point good, you will only entangle yourself the more, and in the end expose yourself. Never over-praise any absent person; especially ladies, in company of ladies : it is the way to bring envy and hatred upon those whom you wish well to.
To try whether your conversation is likely to be acceptable to people of sense, imagine what you say writ down, or printed, and consider how it would read; whether it would appear natural, improving, and entertaining; or affected, unmeaning, or mischievous.
It is better, in conversation with positive men, to turn off the subject in dispute with some merry conceit, than keep up the contention to the disturbance of the company.
Do not give your advice upon any extraordinary emergency, nor your opinion upon any difficult point, especially in company of eminent persons, without first taking time to deliberate; if you say nothing, it may not be known whether your silence was owing to ignorance of the subject, or to modesty; if you give a rash and crude opinion, you are effectually and irrecoverably exposed. If you fill your fancy, while you are in company, with suspicions of their thinking meanly of you; if you puff yourself up with imaginations of appearing to them a very witty or profound person; if you discompose yourself with
fears of misbehaving before them ; or any way put yourself out of yourself; you will not appear in your natural colour; but in that of an affected, personated character, which is always disagreeable. It may be useful to study, at leisure, a variety of proper phrases for such occasions as are most frequent in life, as civilities to superiors, expressions of kindness to inferiors; congratulations, condolence, expressions of gratitude, acknowledgment of faults, asking or denying of favours, &c. I prescribe no particular phrases, because (the language of conversation continually fluctuating) they must soon become obsolete. The best method of acquiring the accomplishment of a graceful and easy manner of expression for the common occasions of life, is attention, and imitation of wellbred people. Nothing makes a man appear more contemptible than barrenness, pedantry, or impropriety of expression. If you should be employed in serious business, do not set up for a buffoon.
Flattery is a compound of falsehood, selfishness, servility, and ill-manners: any one of these qualities is enough to make a character thoroughly odious: who then would be the person to have any concern with him whose mind is deformed by four such vices?
If you must speak upon a difficult point, be the last speaker if you can. You will not be agreeable to company if you strive to bring in, or keep up a subject unsuitable to their capacities or humour. You will never convince a man of ordinary sense, by
overbearing his understanding : if you dispute with him in such a manner as to show a due deference for his judgment, your complaisance may win him, though your saucy
arguments could not.
Avoid disputes altogether, if possible ; especially in mixed companies, and with ladies: you will hardly convince any one, and may disoblige or startle them, and get
yourself the character of a conceited pragmatical person; whereas, that of an agreeable companion, which you may have without giving yourself any great air of learning or
depth, may be more advantageous to you in life, and will make you welcome in all companies. The frequent use of the name of God, or the devil: allusions to passages of Scripture; mocking at any thing serious and devout; oaths, vulgar by-words, cant phrases,
affected hard words, when familiar terms will do as well; scraps of Latin, Greek, or French; quotations from plays, spoke in a theatrical manner: all these much used in
conversation render a person very contemptible to grave and wise men.
If you send people away from your company well pleased with themselves, you need not fear but they will be well enough pleased with you, whether they have received any instruction from you or not. Most people had rather be pleased than instructed. Do not tell unlikely or silly stories, if you know them to be true. There is no greater rudeness to company than entertaining them with scolding your servants.
Avoid little oddities in behaviour ; but do not despise a man of worth for his being somewhat awkward or less agreeable, in his manner. I hardly know any company more disagreeable than that of those who are ever straining to hook in some quirk of wit or drollery, whatever be the subject of conversation. Reflect in yourself, after you have passed some hours in such company, and observe whether it leaves any thing in your mind but emptiness, levity, or disgust. Again observe, after you have passed some time in the conversation of men of wisdom and learning, if you do not find your mind filled with judicious reflections, and worthy resolutions : if you do not, it is because you have
not a mind capable of them. If you can express yourself to be perfectly understood
in ten words, never use a dozen : go not about to prove, by a long series of reasoning, what all the world is ready to own.
If any one takes the trouble of finding fault with you, you ought in reason to suppose he has some regard for you, else he would not run the hazard of disobliging you,
and drawing upon himself your hatred. Do not ruffle or provoke any man: why should any one be the worse for coming into company with you? Be not yourself provoked: why should you give any man the advantage over you?
To say that one has opinions very different from those commonly received, is saying that he either loves singularity, or that he thinks for himself. Which of the two is the case can only be found by examining the grounds of his opinions.
Do not appear to the public too sure, or too eager upon any project: if it should miscarry, which it is a chance but it does, you will be laughed at; the surest
way to prevent which, is not to tell your designs or prospects in life. If you give yourself a loose in mixed company, you may almost depend on being pulled to pieces as soon as
your back is turned, however they may seem entertained with your conversation.
For common conversation, men of ordinary abilities will upon occasions do well enough ; and you may always pick something out of any man's discourse, by which you
may profit. For an intimate friend to improve by, you must search half a country over, and be glad if you can find him at last.
Do not give your time to every superficial acquaintance; it is bestowing what is to you of inestimable worth upon one who is not likely to be better for it. If a person has behaved to you in an unaccountable manner, do not at once conclude him a bad man, unless
you find his character given up by all who know him; nor then, unless the facts alleged against him be undoubtedly proved, and wholly inexcusable. But this is not advising
you to trust a person whose character you have any reason to suspect. Nothing can be more absurd than the common way of fixing people's characters. Such a one has disobliged me, therefore he is a villain. Such another has done me a kindness; therefore he is a saint. Never contend about small matters with superiors, nor with inferiors: if you get the better of the first, you provoke their formidable resentment: if you engage with
the latter, you debase yourself. If you act a part truly great, you may expect that men
of mean spirits, who cannot reach you, will endeavour, by detraction) to pull you down to their level. But posterity will do you justice, for the envy raised against you will die with you. Superficial people are more agreeable the first time you are in their company than ever afterwards: men of judgment improve every succeeding conversation; beware,
therefore, of judging by one interview. You will not anger a man so much by showing him that you hate him, as by expressing a contempt of him. Most young women had rather have any of their good qualities slighted, than their beauty; yet that is the most
inconsiderable accomplishment of a woman of real merit. You will be always reckoned by the world nearly of the same character with those whose company you keep. You will please go much the less, if you go into company determined to shine. Let your conversation appear to rise out of thoughts suggested by the occasion, not strained, or premeditated: nature always pleases: affectation is always odious.
