Dignity 2
Prudence in action is the conducting of one's affairs in such a manner as is necessary and proper, all circumstances duly considered and balanced; and avoiding whatever may be likely to produce inconvenience with respect to secular concerns. Imprudence is seen as much in neglecting what ought to be done, and at the proper time for doing it, as in taking rash and inconsiderate steps. There is not a more promising sign in a young person, than a readiness to bear the advice of those whose age and experience qualify them for judging maturely. The knowledge of the world, and of the arts of life, can only be attained by experience and action. Therefore, if a young person, who, through obstinacy, rejects the advice of experienced people, succeeds in his designs, it is owing to some strange interposition of Providence, or concurrence of circumstances. For such a one, entering into life, wholly unacquainted with the difficulties and dangers of it, and resolutely bent against advice, runs the same hazard as a person, wholly ignorant of sailing, who should, against the judgment of experienced pilots, undertake to steer a ship through the most dangerous sea, in a tempest. It seems at first view, a very odd turn in human nature,
that young people are generally much more conceited of their own judgments than those who are come to maturity. One would wonder how they should miss reflecting, that persons more advanced in age than themselves have of course the advantage of so many years experience beyond themselves; and that, if all other things were equal, the single circumstance of having seen more of the world, must necessarily enable them to judge better of it. Life is a journey; and they only who have travelled a considerable way in it, are fit to direct those who are setting out.
Let me, therefore, advise my young readers to pay the utmost deference to the advices or commands of those who are their superiors in age and experience. Old people, it must be owned, will sometimes obtrude their advice in a manner not very engaging. Their infirmities, the usual attendants of age, together with their concern for the wrong steps they see their young relations and acquaintance taking, will sometimes occasion their treating them with what may be taken for illnature; whereas, it may be in reality their love for the persons of their young friends, and their zeal for their interests, which warm them. Do not, therefore, attend to the manner of the advice, but only to the matter of it. It would be of very little consequence to you, if you was going towards a precipice in a
dark night, whether you were warned of your danger by a rude clown, or by a polite gentleman, so you escaped it. In the same manner, if a remonstrance is made upon any
part of one's conduct, in the roughest manner; the only thing to be considered, is, whether we can profit by it, and the rudeness of the person, who made it, should go for nothing; as one would swallow a medicine, not for its gratefulness to the taste, but for its effect upon the constitution.
As to the submission a young man owes to his superiors, as parents, masters, &c. if it were not a duty, prudence alone would lead him to yield to it readily and cheerfully in all cases that are lawful. For it is to be considered, that the consequences of refusing are incomparably worse than those of submission; the world being always ready to lay the blame upon the young person, in case of a rupture between them, and not upon the old ;
and nothing being more to the disadvantage of a young person's character than the reproach of an obstinate or unsettled turn of mind. It would indeed be impossible
to carry on the affairs of the world, if children, apprentices, servants, and other dependants, were to spend time in disputing the commands of their superiors; it being, in
many cases, hard to give an account of the fitness or unfitness of things prescribed, and in many altogether improper. Nor is it less commendable, nor less graceful to obey cheerfully, than to direct prudently. No person it likely to command well who has never learnt to obey. It will be very imprudent in a young person to take any material step in life without consulting the aged, and experienced especially, if possible, such as have had experience in his way of life. In one's choice of a friend, for such occasions, smoothness of speech or complaisance is not to be regarded. On the contrary, the most valuable
friend is he who joins to a thorough knowledge of men and things, matured by age and experience, an open, blunt, and honest behaviour; who will rather magnify, than palliate the faults and imprudences of his friend, to his face, however he may defend him behind his back; and will not, on account of the trifling hazard of disobliging, suffer him to take a wrong step without making an open and honest remonstrance upon it.
There is one particular consideration that makes asking the advice of one's friends prudent and judicious. It is, That, if it should so happen, as it often must, in spite of
one's utmost precaution, that his affairs should take a wrong turn, he will not only have the less reason to reflect upon himself, but the mouths of others will generally be
stopped: as he may for the most part have his advisers at least, from mere self-conceit, to stand up for the prudence of his conduct, which was the consequence of their advice.
You will often find, that in the very proposing to your friend your difficulty, you yourself shall hit upon the means of getting over it before he has time to give you his
opinion upon it. And you will likewise find that in advising with a friend, a word dropt by him shall furnish you a valuable hint for your conduct, which you shall wonder
how you yourself came to miss. It must be owned, however, that there are cases in which
no man can judge so well what steps should be taken as the person concerned, because he himself may know several important particulars in his own affairs, which would make it highly improper for him. to follow the directions another person might give, who was not aware of those circumstances. Whoever, therefore, gives up his judgment, and acts contrary to his own better Knowledge, in compliance with the advice of his acquaintance, or with common custom, is guilty of a weakness, the consequences of which may prove fatal.
HERE is nothing that contributes more to the ready and advantageous dispatch, as well as to the safety and success of business, than method and regularity. Let a man set down in his memorandum-book, every morning, the several articles of business he has to do through the day; and beginning with the first person he is to call upon, or the first place he is to go to, finish that affair (if it is to be done at all) before he begins another; and so on to the rest. A man of business, who observes this method, will hardly ever find himself hurried or disconcerted by forgetfulness : and he who sets down all his transactions
in writing, and keeps his accounts, and the whole state of his affairs, in a distinct and accurate order, so that he can at any time, by looking into his books, presently see in
what condition his business is, and whether he is in a thriving or declining way; such a one, I say, deserves properly the character of a man of business, and has a fair
prospect of carrying his schemes to an happy issue. But such exactness as this will by no means suit the man of pleasure, who has other things in his head. The way to transact a great deal of business in a little time, and with great certainty, is to observe these rules.
To speak to the point. To use no more words than are necessary fully to express your meaning; and to study beforehand, and set down in writing afterwards, a sketch of the transaction.
There is one piece of prudence, above all others, absolutely necessary to those who expect to raise themselves in the world by an employment of any kind; I mean a
constant and unwearied application to the main pursuit. By means of indefatigable diligence, joined with frugality, we see many people in the lowest and most laborious
stations in life, raise themselves to such circumstances as will allow them, in their old age, that ease from labour of body and anxiety of mind, which is necessary to make
the decline of life supportable. I have heard of a tradesman who, at his first setting out, opened and shut his shop every day, for several weeks together, without selling goods to the value of one penny, who by the force of application for a course of years, raised at last a handsome fortune; and I have known many who have had a variety of opportunities for settling themselves comfortably in the world, and who for want of steadiness to carry any one scheme to perfection, have sunk from one degree of wretchedness to another for many years together, without any hopes of ever getting above distress and pinching want.
There is hardly an employment in life so mean that it will not afford a subsistence, if constantly applied to: and it is only by dint of indefatigable diligence, that a fortune
is to be acquired in business. An estate got by what is commonly called a lucky hit, is a rare instance; and he who expects to have his fortune made in that way, is
much about as rational as he who should neglect all probable means of living, on the hopes that he should sometime or other find a treasure. The misfortune of indolence is, that there is no such thing as continuing in the same condition without an income of one kind or other. If a man does not bestir himself, poverty must overtake him at last. If he continues to give out for the necessary charges of life, and will not take the pains to gain somewhat to supply his outgivings, his funds must at length come to an end, and misery come upon him at a period of life when he is least able to grapple with it, I mean in
old age, if not before. The character of a sluggard must, I think, be owned to be one of the most contemptible. In proportion to a person's activity for his own good and that of his fellow-creatures, is he to be reckoned a more or less valuable member of society : and if all the idle people in a nation were to die in one year, the loss would be inconsiderable,
in comparison of what the community must suffer by being deprived of a very few of the active and industrious. Every moment of time ought to be put to its proper use, either in business, in improving the mind, in the innocent and necessary relaxations and entertainments of life, or in the care of our souls.
And as we ought to be much more frugal of our time than our money, the one being infinitely more valuable than the other, so ought we to be particularly watchful of opportunities. There are times and seasons proper for every purpose of life: and a very material part of prudence is to judge rightly of them, and make the best of them. If you have, for example, a favour to ask of a phlegmatic gloomy man, take him, if you can, oyy his bottle. If you want to deal with a covetous man, by no means propose your business to him immediately after he has been paying away money, but rather after he has been
receiving. If you know a person, for whose interest you have occasion, is unhappy in his family, put yourself in his way abroad, rather than wait on him at his own house.
A statesman will not be likely to give you a favourable audience immediately after meeting with a disappointment in any of his schemes. There are even many people who are always sour and illhumoured from their rising till they have dined. And as in persons, so in things, opportunity is of the utmost consequence. The thorough knowledge of the probable rise and fall of merchandise, the favourable seasons of importing and exporting, a quick eye to see, and a nimble hand to seize advantages as they turn up; these are the talents which raise men from low to affluent circumstances. It would be greatly for the advantage of men of business, if they made it a rule never to trust any thing of
consequence to another which they can by any means do themselves. Let another have my interest ever so much at heart, I am sure I have it more myself: and no substitute one can employ, can understand one's business so well as the principal, which gives him great advantage for doing things in the best way, as he can change his measures according to circumstances, which another has not authority to do. As for dependants of all kinds, it is to be remembered, always, that their master's interest possesses, at most, only the second place in their minds.
Self-love will ever be the ruling principle, and no fidelity whatever will prevent a person from bestowing a good deal of thought upon his own concerns, which must break in, less or more, upon his diligence in consulting the interest of his constituent. How men of business can venture, as they do, to trust the great concerns some of them have, for one half of every week in the year, which is half the year, to servants, and they expect others to take care of their business, when they will not be at the trouble of minding it themselves, is to me inconceivable. Nor does the detection, from time to time, of the frauds of such people, seem at all to deter our men of business from trusting to them.
There is, indeed, nothing more difficult than to know the characters of those we confide in. How should we imagine we can know those of others, when we are so uncertain about our own? What man can say of himself, I never shall be capable of such a vice or weakness? And if not of himself, much less of another. Who would then needlessly trust to another, when he can hardly be sure of himself?
Next to diligence and assiduity in business, frugality and economy are the most necessary for him who would raise himself in the world by his own industry. Simple nature is contented with a little, and there is hardly any employment which, if pursued with prudence and attention, will not yield an income sufficient for the necessary uses of life: as, on the other hand, no revenue is so great as to be proof against extravagance. Witness the emperor Caligula, who in a few years spent the riches of the world, at least of the Roman world; I mean the immense treasures his avaricious predecessor Tiberius had been amassing for twenty-two years, besides the current revenues of the empire; and found himself reduced to straits, from the most exorbitant riches. Every person's experience confirms this truth, that those pleasures of life which cost the most are the least satisfactory, and contrariwise. The noise of balls, plays, and masquerades, is
tiresome ; the parade of gilt coaches, of powdered footmen, and of state-visits, is fulsome; while the conversation of a wise and virtuous friend, the endearments of a
faithful wife and innocent children, charity to the indigent, which none but a good economist can bestow, the pursuit of useful and ornamental knowledge, the study of
virtue and religion, these are entertainments ever new and ever delightful. And if a wise man may thus be satisfied from himself; if the noblest pleasures and truest enjoyments are only to be had in our own hearts And in our own houses, how great is the folly of mankind who fly from the genuine, the rational, the cheap, and easy attainable enjoyments of life, in a mad pursuit after the imaginary, expensive, and tiresome vanities of show and ostentation ! Were the enjoyments which pomp and grandeur yield (supposing them unembittered with reflections on their fatal consequences, which will ever be crowding into the mind) infinitely more exquisite than those of virtue and sobriety, which is the very contrary of the truth; a prudent man would take care, in consideration of the shortness of life, how he indulged them to the neglect of the serious business of life, or to the ruin of his fortune. None but a madman would lavish away his whole patrimony in one season, with the prospect of poverty and misery for the remainder of his days: for he would consider that a life languished out in wretchedness, or in dependance, would immensely overbalance the pleasure of reflecting that he had spent one year in hearing the finest music, in seeing the politest company, in eating the rarest food, and in drinking the richest wines the world could afford: nay, he would foresee that the reflection upon past pleasures and gaieties would only render his misery so much the more intolerable. There is not, indeed, a more deplorable case than that of a person, who, by his own folly, has reduced himself to beggary: for, besides the other distresses he must struggle with, he has the cruel stings of his own reflections to torture him, and is deprived of the poor consolation of the sympathy and compassion of his acquaintance.
Every person who happens, by any means whatever, though wholly out of his own power either to foresee or prevent, to sink in the world, may lay his account with meeting no little contempt and ill usage from the bulk of his acquaintance, and even from those for whom he has in his prosperity done the greatest kindnesses. But when it is known that a man's misfortune's are owing to his own extravagance, people have too good a pretence for withholding their compassion or assistance, and for treating him with neglect and contempt. It will, therefore, be a young person's wisdom, before he goes too far, to make
sudden reflections as these: "Shall I lavish away in youthful pleasure and folly the patrimony that must support me my whole life? Shall I indulge myself in rioting and
drunkenness till I have not a morsel of bread? Shall I revel in plays, balls, and music-gardens, till I bring myself to a gaol? Shall I waste my substance in regaling a set of wretches who will turn their backs upon me whenever they have undone me? Shall I pass my youth like a lord, and be a beggar in my old age?"
There is nothing more unaccountable than the common practice in our times, among that part of the people who ought to be the examples of frugality as well as of industry, the citizens of London; I mean the usual way of setting out in life. It seems, generally speaking, as if our traders thought themselves in duty bound to go to the utmost stretch of expense which their circumstances will afford, and even beyond, the very first year of their setting up. That a young shopkeeper, and his new married wife, whose joint fortunes would not make up five thousand pounds, should begin with sitting in state to receive company, keeping footmen, carriages, and country-houses, and awkwardly mimicking the extravagances of the other end of the town, before they know how trade
may turn out, or how numerous a family of children they may have to provide for; what can be more preposterous? As if the public had so little discernment as to conclude that people's circumstances were always according to the show they made. How easy is it for any man to increase his expense, if he finds his income increase? And how hard is it to be obliged, after setting out in a grand manner, to retrench, and lower the sails: it is not
indeed to be done in trade without affecting a person's credit, which accordingly obliges many traders to go on in the exorbitant way they first set out in, to their own ruin, and that of others who have been engaged with them. In some countries, insolvency, where a good account of the causes which brought it on cannot be given, is punished with death. If the law of England were as severe, what the fate of many of the bankrupt citizens of
London must have been, every one may judge. The great consumption of private fortunes is owing chiefly to those expenses which are constant, and run on, day after day, the whole year round. People do not seem to attend sufficiently to the consequences of the expense of one dish, or one bottle of wine more than enough in their daily economy. Yet the saving of three or four shillings a day will amount to sixty or eighty pounds in a
year; which sum, saved up yearly, for thirty years, the ordinary time a man carries on business, would amount to near five thousand pounds, reckoning interest; and still more, if you suppose it laid out in an advantageous trade.
If any young gentleman of fortune imagines the largeness of his income sufficient to render frugality and economy useless, a little experience will show him, to his cost,
that no error can be greater. The charge of maintaining a number of servants, who are to be supported not only in necessaries, but in all the waste and destruction they
please to make; the expense of coachmen, footmen, horses, and hounds, a town-house and country-seat, is enormous. But if to these there be added the charge of a mistress, that alone will surmount all the rest; and the expense of a steward will exceed all the others put together: for, as none of the other dependants upon a great man have it in their power to do more than run away with a little of his cash, or the provisions of his house from time to time, they cannot utterly ruin him without his own knowledge: but the steward, having the receiving and paying of all in his own hands, may very easily, in a short time, if his accounts are not looked into, appropriate to himself the bulk of the estate, and ruin his master before he has any suspicion of his affairs being out of order.
It seems to me very unaccountable that men of fortune should think it necessary to go to the utmost stretch of their incomes, and generally beyond them; when they must find, that a crowd of servants and dependants is but a disturbance to happiness, which requires peace and tranquillity, and flies from noise and ostentation. Is it necessary for popularity? By no means. Half the money laid out for the service of the public, or in judicious charities, would procure a gentleman the real esteem and affection of his neighbours; whereas, the greatest expense laid out upon those bloodsuckers which generally feed
upon the great, does but expose him to their contempt, who laugh in their sleeve to find they can so grossly gull him out of his money. The employing a number of working people in improving barren grounds, in laying out plantations, in raising buildings for a continual increase of tenants upon a thriving estate, with the acquisition of new inhabitants, the encouragement of manufactures, and providing for the poor; these are the arts that will gain a country gentleman more popularity than keeping open house the
whole year round. Let me advise young people to be particularly cautious of new schemes or projects. There is not one of a hundred that ever succeeds at all; nor one of many hundreds that brings their inventors any thing but disappointment and ruin. The reason is pretty plain : it requires a great expense to set any new scheme on foot. The bulk of mankind are prejudiced against novelties, and consequently are apt to oppose them. The generality of people are likewise jealous of every scheme that may any way affect their interest; and many, from pure envy, take a pleasure in opposing and depreciating every new proposal. The contriver himself is greatly at a loss, being
obliged to try various methods to bring his designs to bear, and to lay out a certain expense for an uncertain profit. So that we observe, accordingly, whoever projects any thing new in science, in mechanics, or in trade, seldom does more than open the way for others to profit by his ingenuity.
What shall be said upon the subject of pleasures and diversions in an age in which all ranks, sexes, and ages, run to excess in this respect? And yet to make the amusements of life the business of life, is absurd in any rational being who has ever heard of a judgment to come, and who is not absolutely certain (which I believe hardly any one will pretend) that he never shall be called to give an account of the use he has made of his time. But if
there be any absurdity greater than another, it is, that a man of business should set up for a man of taste and pleasures: yet we see the public diversions of this great city crowded and supported chiefly by the citizens. We see those whose business is in town, outvying one another in the elegancy of their country-houses; plays, balls, operas, music-gardens, concerts, resorted to by the lowest mechanics; the consequences of which extravagancies
are bankruptcies innumerable: not to mention frauds, robberies, forgeries, and so forth. It is no easy matter to support a family in the most frugal way; but when to the ordinary conveniences of life, the above extravagancies are to be added, there is no end of it; and the covetousness of a spendthrift is incomparably more mischievous than that of a miser. The latter will, at worst, only grind the face of the poor, and take the advantage of all
that are less cunning than himself; but the former will not stick at forgery, robbery, or murder. At the same time that it is hardly possible to say too much against the inordinate pursuit of diversions, which even defeats its own end, becoming, through excess, a
burden and fatigue, instead of a relaxation; after all, I say, that may be urged against this reigning folly of our times, I know no just reason why a man of business should deny himself the moderate use of such innocent amusements as his fortune or leisure will allow; his fortune, in a consistency with supporting his family, and contributing
to the relief of the indigent, and his leisure, in a consistency with the thorough knowledge of the state of his own affairs, and doing offices of kindness to those about him. Some of the most innocent amusements I know, are reading, viz. history, lives, geography, and natural philosophy, with a very little choice poetry: the conversation of a few agreeable friends, and drawing, where there is genius for it. To these may be added, riding on horse-back once or twice in a week, where it can be done conveniently. Music is never safely indulged, where there is too great a desire to excel in it, for that generally draws people into an expense of time and money, above what the accomplishment, carried to the greatest length, is worth. As for cards, and all other ways of gaming, they are the
ruin of rational conversation, the bane of society, and the curse of the nation.
There is one error in the conduct of the industrious part of mankind, whose effects prove as fatal to their fortunes as those of some of the first vices, though it is generally the most active and the ablest men who run into it: I mean over trading. Profusion itself is not more dangerous ; nor does idleness bring more people to ruin than launching out into trade beyond their abilities. The exuberent credit given in trade, though it is sometimes of advantage, especially to people whose capitals are small, is yet perhaps, upon the whole, more detrimental than a general diffidence would be. For a young trader to take in utmost credit he can have, is only running the utmost risk he can run. And if he would consider, that as others trust him to a great extent, he must lay his account with trusting those he deals with to a great value likewise; and that consequently he must run a great many hazards of his own payments falling short, and that the failure or disappointment of two or three considerable sums at the same time may disable him from making his payments
regularly, which is utter ruin to his credit; if, I say, a young trader were to consider in this manner the conscquence of things, he would not think the offer of large credit so much a favour as a snare; especially if he likewise reflected, that whoever offers him large credit, and for a long time, without sufficient security, will think he has a right to charge a very considerable profit upon the commodities he sells him ; and, consequently, the advantage he can gain by them, must be too inconsiderable to make up for the risk he must run. The trader who gives and takes large credit, especially if he has large concerns in foreign parts, and is not possessed of a very considerable fortune, must be liable to such hazards, and such terror and anxiety, that I should think a very moderate profit arising from trading safely, and within a reasonable compass, much the most eligible. I know but one sort of trade in which large credit might be safely taken, viz where one could quickly make sales of large quantities of goods for ready money; and in such a trade, to take
credit when one might buy to greater advantage for ready money, would be very absurd.
There is no subject which men of business ought to have oftener in their view than the precariousness of human affairs. In order to the success of any scheme, it is necessary that every material circumstance take place; as, in order to the right going of a watch or clock, it is necessary that every one of the wheels be in order. To succeed in trade, it is necessary that a man be possessed of a large capital; that he be well qualified; (which alone comprehends a great many particulars;) that his integrity be unsuspected; that he have no enemies to blast his credit; that foreign and home markets keep nearly according to his expectations; that those he deals with, and credits to any great extent, be both as honest and sufficient as he believes them to be; that his funds never fail him when he depends on them ; and that, in short, every thing turn out to his expectation. But surely it must require a very great degree of that sanguine temper, so common in youth, to make a man persuade himself that there is no manner of hazard of his finding himself deceived, or disappointed in some one, among so many particulars. Yet we commonly see instances of bankruptcies, where a trader shall have gone to the extent of perhaps ten times the value of his capital; and by means of large credit, and raising money with one hand to pay with the other, has supported himself upon the effects of other people, till at length, some one or other of his last shifts failing him, down be sinks with his own weight, and brings hundreds to ruin with him. 
Upon the head of overtrading, and hastening to be rich, I cannot help making a remark on the conduct of many traders of large capitals, who, for the sake of adding to a heap, already too great, monopolize the market, or trade for a profit which they know dealers of smaller fortunes cannot possibly live by. If such men really think that their raising themselves thus on the ruin of others is justifiable, and that riches got in this manner are fairly gained, they must either have neglected properly informing their consciences, or must have stilled their remonstrances.
Whoever would thrive in trade, let him take care, above all things, to keep up to strict integrity. If a trader is once known to be guilty of taking exorbitant profits, or other
unfair advantages of those he deals with, there is an end of his character: and unless a man can get a fortune by one transaction, it is madness in prudentials to hazard his
whole reputation at once : and even if he could, giving his soul tor an estate would be but a losing trade. But of this, more hereafter.
When it happens that one is solicited to lend money, or interpose his credit for any person in difficulties, the right way is to make sure either that the sum furnished or engaged for, be such as he can lay his account with losing, without any material detriment to his affairs, or that be have an unexceptionable security in his bands. The consequences of lending money, or being security for others, generally prove the loss of both money and friend: for people are commonly at the last pinch when they come to borrowing, and it is not an inconsiderable sum that will keep them from sinking: and the demand of payment
seldom fails to occasion disgust between friends. The best method I know for supporting a man of merit in distress, is for a set of three or four, or more, according to the
occasion, to contribute conjunctly, so that the loss being divided, if it should prove a loss, may not prove fatal to any one concerned. And if in this, or any other prudent way, one can do a service, in a time of need, to a person of merit, one ought always to rejoice in the opportunity; and he will be highly to blame who neglects it. But as there is infinite craft and knavery among mankind, let me advise young people to beware of the common weakness that period of life is generally subject to, I mean credulity. The most openhearted are the most liable to be imposed upon by the designing ; though one would think a man's knowing his own intentions to be sincere and honest, should be no reason for his concluding every one he meets to be of the same character. There is no certain method of avoiding the snares of the crafty: but it would be a good custom if men of business made it their usual practice, in all their dealings, where it is practicable, to draw up in writing a minute or memorial of every transaction, subscribed by both, with
a clause signifying, that, in case of any difference, they should both agree to submit the matter to arbitration: for it is very common for a designing person, in making an
agreement, to take no notice of the reasonable and natural consequences of an advantageous concession, but to put off the person he wants to take an advantage of, with a general phrase, as, We shan't fall out; I assure you I mean you well, I won't wrong you : and such like: and when accounts come to be settled, and the party who thinks himself aggrieved declares that he made the bargain altogether with the prospect of having such and such advantages allowed him; No, says the sharper, I never told you I would: though it is the very same, to all intents and purposes of deceiving, as if he had expressly consented to it; yet the unhappy sufferer must sit down with the loss, because he can only say he was deceived by insinuations, and not by a direct fraud within the reach of the law. One cannot therefore be too exact in making contracts; nor is there, indeed, any safety in dealing with deceitful and avaricious people, though one thinks he uses the utmost
precaution. It will, I believe, generally be found of good use, in order to understand the real sentiments of mankind, and to discover when they have any indirect design, to observe carefully their looks. There is something in knavery that will hardly bear the inspection of a piercing eye: and you will generally observe, in a sharper, an unsteady and confused look. And if a person is persuaded of the uncommon sagacity of one he is to appear before, he will hardly be able to muster up enough of impudence and artifice to bear him through without faltering. It will therefore be a good way to try one whom you suspect of a design upon you, by fixing your eyes upon his, and by bringing up a supposition of your having to do with one whose integrity you suspected, and what you would do in bsuch a case. If the person you are talking with be really bwhat you suspect, he will hardly be capable of keeping his countenance.
One ought always to suspect men remarkably avaricious. Great love of money is a great enemy to honesty. The aged are more dangerous than young people. They are more desirous of gain, and know more indirect ways of coming at it, and of outwiting others, than the young. It will be your wisdom to be cautious of all such; and of those, who in an affected manner bring in religion on all occasions, in season and out of season; of all smooth and fawning people; of those who are very talkative, and who, in dealing with you, endeavour to draw off your attention from the point in hand, by a number of incoherent reflections introduced at random, and of the extremely suspicious; for it is generally owing to a consciousness of a designing temper, that people are apt to suspect others. If ever you hear a person boast of his having got any exorbitant advantage in his dealings, you may, generally speaking, conclude such a one not too rigorously honest. It is seldom that a great advantage is to be got, but there must be great disadvantage on the other side. And when you see a person triumph in his having got by another's loss,
you may easily judge of his character. There is a sort of people in the world, of whom the
young and unexperienced stand much in need to be warned. They are the sanguine promisers. They may be. divided into two sorts. The first are those, who, from a
foolish custom of fawning upon all those they come into company with, have learned a habit of promising to do great kindnesses, which they have no thought of performing. The other are a sort of warm people, who, while they are lavishing away their promises, have really some thoughts of doing what they engage for: but afterwards, when the time of performance comes, the sanguine fit being gone off, the trouble or expense appears in another light; the promiser cools, and the expectant is bubbled, and perhaps greatly injured by the disappointment. When it so happens, as it will often, unavoidably, in spite
of the greatest wisdom, and the strictest integrity of conduct, that a man of business has reason to think he cannot long stand it, but must make a stop of payments, it will be
his wisdom to call together his creditors, to let them know the state of his affairs before they come to the worst; and gain, by an honest and full surrender of all, that forbearance and favour which are always readily granted on such occasions. The longer a bad affair of that kind goes on, the worse it grows: the constant expense of living, diminishes the funds; the accounts become the more involved, and more and more bad debts sink the value of the unfortunate man's estate. Nor is such a misfortune so extremely formidable, where a trader can make it appear that neither gross mismanagement, nor indirect conduct
have occasioned it. On the contrary, it has often happened, that a trader has, by showing a singular degree of honesty and disinterestedness on such an occasion, so won the compassion and esteem of his creditors, that they have not only allowed him time to make up his affairs, but have even given him such encouragement, and done him
such kindnesses, as have enabled him to raise himself, by his industry, to circumstances he was not likely ever to have arrived at. If a trader will flounder on, from misfortune to misfortune, in hopes of getting clear by some lucky hit, he must be content to take the consequences; but prudence will direct to build no expectations on any scheme for the success of which one has not many different probabilities in case of the failure of one or two. In case of bankruptcy, or otherwise, when an unfortunate trader, through the lenity of his creditors, is discharged, on giving up his effects, and paying as far as they will go, there is not the least pretence for questioning whether he is obliged to make up the deficiency if ever it should be in his power. If every man is in justice obliged to make full payment of all he owes, there is no doubt hut in this case there is the same obligation, or
rather indeed a stronger; because the creditors have quitted part of what they had a legal claim to, and have thereby laid him under an obligation to do them justice, if ever it should he in his power.
The success of business being so extremely precarious, it is a very considerable part of prudence to take care what sort of people one is concerned with. One would not choose to take credit of an avaricious and cruel man, lest it should happen, by an unlucky run of trade, that one's affairs should go into confusion, and one should fall under the power of such a person; because one could expect nothing from such a creditor but the most rigorous treatment the law would allow. The knowledge of human nature, the connection between men's general characters and their respective behaviour, and the prudence of using mankind according to their dispositions and circumstances, so as to gain one's
laudable designs by them, is a very important part of conduct.
A miser, for example, is by no means a proper person to apply to for a favour that will cost him any thing. But if he be a man of any principle, be will make an excellent
partner in trade, or arbitrator in a dispute about property: for he will condescend to little things, and stickle for trifles, which a generous man would scorn. A passionate man will fly into a rage at a trifling affront; but he will, generally speaking, soon forget the his obligation, and will be glad to do any service m his power to make it up with you. It is not, therefore, by far so dangerous to disoblige such a one, as the gloomy, sullen mortal, who hardly seems displeased, and yet will wait seven years for an opportunity of doing you a mischief. Again, a cool slow man is, generally speaking, the fittest to ad-
vise with: but for dispatch of business, make use of the warm, sanguine temper.
An old man will generally give you the best advice; but the young is the fittest for bustling for your interest.
There are some men of no character at all; but take a new tincture from the last company they were in. It is not safe to have any thing to do with such. Some men are wholly ruled by their wives, and most men a good deal influenced by them ; as in matters of the economy and decorum of life it is fit they should. It will therefore be prudent, generally speaking, to accommodate one's schemes to the humour of both parties, when one is
to enter into important concerns with a married man. It is in vain to look for any thing very valuable in the mind of a covetous man. Avarice is generally the vice of abject spirits ; as extravagance often, not always, of generous minds. Men who have a great talent at getting of money, most commonly have no other; and you may for the most part take it for granted, that the man who has raised exorbitant wealth from nothing, has been too much engaged in the pursuit of riches to mind his own improvement, or any thing besides money. A bully is generally a coward: when, therefore, one happens unluckily to have to do with such a one, the best way is to make up to him boldly, and answer him with firmness; if you show the least sign of submission he will take the advantage of it to use you ill. A boaster is to be suspected in all he says: such men have a natural infirmity, which makes them forget what they are about, and run into a thousand extravagances
which have no connection with truth; their assertions, their professions of friendship, their promises, and their threatenings, go for nothing with men of understanding
and knowledge of the world : they are by no means to be trusted with a secret: if they do not discover it from vanity, they will through levity. There is the same danger in trusting the man who loves his bottle, and is often disordered with liquor.
A meek tempered man is not the proper person to solicit business for you: his modesty will be easily confounded: nor is the man of passion, nor the talkative man: the first will be apt to be put out of temper, and the other to forget himself, and blunder out somewhat that may be to the prejudice of the negociation. The fittest character to be concerned with, is that in which are united an inviolable integrity, founded upon rational principles of virtue and religion, a cool but daring temper, a friendly heart, a ready hand, long experience, and extensive knowledge of the world,' with a solid reputation of many years standing, and easy circumstances. A man's ruling passion is the key by which you may
let yourself into his character, and may pretty nearly guess at his future conduct, if he be not a wit or a fool; for they act chiefly from caprice. There are likewise connections between the different parts of men's characters which it will be useful for you to study. If you find a man to be cowardly, for example, you may suspect him to be cruel, deceitful, and sordid. If you know another to be hasty and passionate, you may generally take it for
granted, he is open and artless; and so on. But these rules admit of exceptions.
There are six sorts of people at whose hands you need not expect much kindness. The sordid and narrow minded think of nobody but their noble selves. The lazy will not take the trouble to serve you. The busy have not time to think of you. The overgrown rich man is above minding any one who needs his assistance. The poor and unhappy has neither spirit nor ability. The good natured fool, however willing, is not capable of serving you.
In negotiating, there are a number of circumstances to be considered, the neglect of any of which may defeat your whole scheme. First, the sex. Women, generally speaking, are naturally diffident and timorous; not admirers of plain undisguised truth, apt to be shocked at the least defect of delicacy in the address of those who approach them; fond of new schemes; if frugal, apt to deviate into sordid narrowness; almost universally given to
show and finery; easily influenced by inconsiderable motives, if suitable to their humour; and not to be convinced of the propriety of your proposal, so much by solid reasoning, as by some witty or lively manner of offering it; once displeased and always cold ; if wicked enough to be revengeful, will stick at nothing to accomplish it. But this last is an uncommon character. 
The age of the person you are to deal with is also to be considered. Young people are easily drawn into any scheme, merely for its being new, especially if any circumstance in it suits their vanity or love of pleasure. They are as easily put out of conceit with a proposal by the next person they converse with. They are not good counsellors ; but are very fit for action, where you prescribe them a track, from which they know they are not to vary, which ought always to be done; for youth is generally precipitate and thoughtless. Old age, on the contrary, is slow, but sure; cautious, generally, to a degree of suspiciousness; averse to new schemes and ways of life; generally inclining towards covetousness; fitter to consult with than to act for you; not to be won by fair speeches, or
convinced by long reasonings; tenacious of old opinions, customs, and formalities; apt to be disobliged with those, especially younger people, who pretend to question their
judgment; fond of deference, and of being listened to. Young people in their anger mean less than they say; old people more. You may make it up with most young men; old people are generally slow in forgiving. The proper time of addressing a person upon an affair of any consequence is to be carefully considered. Wait on a courtier when he, or any friend, whose interest he espouses, is candidate for some place of preferment; he will not then venture to give you a flat denial, (however he may gull you with promises,) for fear you should have it in your power to traverse his design: or when he has just had success in some of his schemes; for, being then in good humour, he may give you a more favourable reception. Do business with a phlegmatic, slow man, after he has drank his bottle; for then his heart is open. Treat with a gay man in the morning; for then, if ever, his head is clear.
