Disquisitions 3
When the septennial bill was proposed, A D 1716, it was pretended, that the people were very generally disaffected, though the rebellion was quelled; and that the hopes of the jacobites were founded on a new parliament. It was proposed first, to suspend the triennial act for once, which would have continued the parliament three years longer. It was questioned whether the septennial bill should be set on foot in the house of lords or commons. It was thought best it should be started in the lords house, where the triennial originated; that the odium might not fall upon, the commons so as to hinder their elections. Triennial elections (they said) keep up party divisions, raise animosities in families, occasion ruinous expences, &c. The only pretence for lengthening parliaments, was the jacobitism of the people, which was owing to the mad cry of The church in danger; set up by the bigotted priesthood.
Could they not see that the contest about elections was owing to the posts and places? Why did they not abolish them, as in Holland? The whigs made a point of carrying the bill, and every oppose of it was to be set down for a tory. The triennial act, when passed, was looked upon by the people as their great security. Why therefore did the people's deputies dare to mention the repeal of it? It had made king William supremely popular. The septennial bill was taking the election from the people, and electing themselves for four years. Parliaments ought not to be altered from what was the known intention of the electors, without new authority obtained from the electors. But that they did not ask; well knowing they should not obtain it. The expence of frequent elections was no argument, because these expences are voluntary. Frequent elections, it was said, produced corruption, [the contrary is the truth, their consciences told them] and corruption produced the parliament which approved the peace of Utrecht. [If corruption does mischief, the business is to remove the materials of corruption. The cause abolished, the effects will cease of course.] Lord Trevor said, the shortest parliaments were the best, and that annual was the constitutional period. That parliaments were longest in the worst times, and when the revolution came in, which brought liberty, with it came short parliaments. It was very necessary, he said, to make regulations for preventing parliaments making encroachments on the constitution, as well as for restraining ministerial encroachments. If the people were disaffected and discontented, whether would the lengthening of parliaments conciliate, or widen the breach? There is no representative of the people but a house, of their own making. Every election, supposing representation adequate, and places out of the way, throws the government again into the hands of the people, where it must always be safe. It is absurd to alledge, that foreign states could not trust us, if our parliaments were shortened. What more permanent than the French court? But who trusts the French court? Let property govern, and all will be safe, and universal confidence will follow. A long parliament made Charles II indifferent about the affections of his people. The lengthening of parliaments tended to produce faction in foreign states, when they saw how easily the British constitution might be broke into. It was therefore observed in the house of peers, that to publish the prevalency of a popish faction in Britain, and to tell foreigners, that the people were not to be trusted with themselves, was confounding all confidence of foreign states in this nation. Articles in the lords protest against committing.
  In the same debate in the house of peers, the duke of Devonshire, in favour of the bill, laboured to set forth the inconveniencies attending triennial parliaments, that they served to produce feuds, animosities, party-divisions, expensive elections, with the other trite stuff commonly urged on that fide of the question. On the contrary, lord Abingdon said, the people looked upon the triennial act, as the great security of their rights and liberties; that if the bill passed the commons, it would be looked upon by those they represented, as a breach of trust. The duke of Kingstone denied the last part of this assertion, and urged that the business of the legislature was to rectify old laws, as well as to make new ones. Lord Paulet said, he did not think it for the king's service, and interest; but before they went any farther, they ought to know the sentiments of the people. His lordship urged that the bill (hewed a distrust of the affections of the people, without which no king could be safe or happy; that king William had gained the hearts of his people by the triennial act; and it would look somewhat strange, that the most popular of our laws should be repealed in a year after the protestant succession took place.
The earl of Peterhorough said, He wished he could give his vote for the bill; but that he could not be for a remedy that might cause a greater evil; and that if this present parliament continued beyond the time for which they were chosen, he knew not how to express the manner of their existence, (unless begging leave of the venerable bench, turning to the bishops) he had recourse to the distinction used in the Athanafian creed, for they would neither be made nor created, but proceeding. 
The earl of Nottingham was against the bill, because he thought it would rather exasperate, than quiet the minds of the people; and that though he could not assign the true cause of the people's dissatisfaction, yet there must have been some secret cause for it: That he hoped people's discontent was not so great, as had been represented; that this bill seemed to imply that the affections of the people were confined to so small a number as the present house of commons; that whatever reasons may be given for continuing this parliament for four years longer, would be at least as strong, (and by the conduct of the ministry might be made much stronger) for continuing it still longer, and even for perpetuating it; which would be an absolute subversion of the third estate of the realm. He then hinted at the danger of enlarging the prerogative, and instanced in the precedent of Henry VlII who persuaded his parliament to give him the abbey-lands under pretence that they would bear part of his expences, which would ease them of taxes, and improve trade; but that soon after he demanded, and obtained, great subsidies, and made use of those lands to enslave the people.
The duke of Argyle said, that designs had been laid to bring in the pretender, long before the king's happy accession to the throne ; and that if the conspirators had improved the ferment, at the election of the last parliament, it was probable their wicked schemes for setting aside the protestant succession had taken place.
The bishop of London said, he was confounded between danger and inconveniences on one side, and destruction on the other. After a debate of five hours the question being put, it was carried in the affirmative, 24 lords protesting against passing the bill, 
  In the same debate in the house of commons the court members said, the septennial bill would strengthen the hands of the king; settle and maintain the protestant succession; encourage our allies to depend upon us, that what shall hereafter be stipulated shall be performed; would break our parties and divisions, and lay a solid foundation for future happiness. And since the present parliament have exerted themselves for the public good, why should they not continue longer together, that they may finish what is so happily begun?
  It was resolved however, 284 against 162, that the bill be committed.
THE shortening of parliaments alone, without exclusion by rotation, would prove only a palliation, not a radical cure. It would, if I may so suddenly change the metophor be stopping some, but not all the leaks. Suppose parliaments reduced to annual, might not a court candidate bribe his electors with a seventh part of what-he now gives for his borough? And might not the minister bribe the corrupt member's vote in the house with a seventh part of what he now gives? 
THE electing of members by ballot would likewise be a check on court influence in parliament. There ought to be no voting viva voce, where balloting would better prevent influence, caballing, animosity, or resentment. Therefore all elections for members of parliament ought, as things are now to be by ballot. Courts of directors, members of the commons in their house, and all those, who are liable to he called to account for their transactions (which peers, electors, jurymen, &c. are not) ought to vote with an audible voice.
But let it be observed here, that making parliamentary representation adequate would supersede the necessity of balloting at elections. For court-influence, and whatever could byass electors, would be then utterly cut up by the roots, when many thousands of votes were necessary to send in the members for any one county, comprehending its towns. To set about bribing 401 electors in order to gain one member, or 202,104 electors to secure a majority in the house, a minister must be lord of the mines of Potosi. 
  It is thought by some authors, that the Athenians choose their 9 archons by ballot for 160 years. Their senate of 400, and the prytanes were chosen by lot.
Balloting was used in some cases at Rome, And when, through the prevalence of corruption, that free manner of voting went into desuetude, it was restored by the lex Papiria and the lex Gabinia. 
The Roman senate did not vote by ballot; but the people did. Salust (if he be the author of the Fr Agm. To Cæsar) and Cicero, in Cornel, express their wish, that balloting were used in the senate.
  Elections of magistrates being troublesome, causing heats, and dissensions among the people of Florence, it was agreed that the electors, who consisted of the president and members of the college [should have been all people of property] should write on tickets, and inclose in a chest, the names of such citizens, as they thought fit to be in the magistracy; and that when the day of election came, a let of those names should be taken out, after shaking the chest, and the names first drawn should be the magistrates elect, and to continue three years and a half. This method was kept up at Florence, while the republican government continued. Aretin disapproves it, but we know not why.
  At Venice all elections are made by ballot, and all voting in the great council, the college, the senate, and all the courts of judicature is done by ballot, without any mistake, or any sort of confusion, or disturbance, which prevents bribery, faction, animosities, and all bad consequences. 
  A motion made in the house of commons, A D, 1707, that all election questions be decided by balloting, was /ejected. To be heard and determined at the bar of the house.
  It was again proposed, A D 1708, that questions concerning elections should (is either competitor desired) be decided by ballot. Carried in the negative. I suppose they thought balloting dangerous, when there were so many jacobites. 
  A bill for electing the Scotch peers by ballot was moved in the house of peers, A D 1734 Miscarried. Many lords protested, because balloting is the freest manner of electing, and the most likely to defeat ministerial influence, which was to be feared in a matter of such consequence.
The method of voting by ballot, say they, appears to us infinitely preferable on many accounts; for as it is well known, there are several alliances among that body of nobility, many of the peers may be put under great difficulties, their alliances drawing them one way, and their opinion and inclination another way. It is also possible, that by pensions from the crown, or by civil or military preferments, some of them may lie under obligations to a court, and be reduced to the hard necessity (under the power of an arbitrary minister) either of losing their employments, or of voting against their nearest relations, and their own opinion also. We apprehend that no election can be called perfectly free, where any number of the electors are under any influence whatsoever, by which they may be biassed in the freedom of their choice
Judge Blackstone is against voting by ballot in the house of commons. Upon what principle is it then, that the house, from time to time, orders the galleries to be cleared? Is it that their constituents may not see, nor know, nor consequently be able to censure their conduct in the house? Of which more fully in the sequel.
  Harrington is for balloting on all occasions.
Balloting is used in many cases, as in the elections in the India-house, the Royal society, &c but it is not practised where, above all, it ought (while things continue on their present foot) to be used, viz in the election of members of parliament.
FROM the inadequate state of representation in parliament, and the enormous length of their period, have arisen several most fatal consequences. The first I shall mention is, That members, being generally elected by handfuls of persons, possessed of little property, and less knowledge of the interest of their country, and impowered as law-makers for seven years, have given up all thought of being accountable to any set of men upon earth for their proceedings in parliament. And it must be allowed, that on the present ludicrous foot on which representation stands, it would be disgracing a gentleman beyond sufferance, to call him to the bar of a set of poor unlettered Cornish burghers, and to expect him to answer the silly questions they would put to him concerning his conduct in the house, of which they cannot be supposed competent judges, any more than they are of the qualifications of a legislator, which shews the absurdity of their having the power of making legislators, not for themselves only, but for the nation in general. Were parliamentary representation upon its proper foot, no member would be sent into the house by a puny burgh; but all would be county-members, and every member would have, to his admission as a lawmaker, the sanction of the majority of the inhabitants of a county, comprehending the cities and towns in it. From such a respectable body as this, it would be an honour to gentlemen to receive instructions; and to be responsible to them, would not be beneath the dignity of any person whatever.
  It is notorious, that the right of constituents to instruct their members, and the consequent duty of members to obey instructions, is in our times questioned by many, and by many given up. Yet it is certain, first, that no harm could come from the members of parliament being obliged to wait for instructions from their constituents, supposing the constituents what they ought to be, because legislation is, the least of any thing, a matter of haste; and the executive is not in the parliament.
There seems to be a palpable inconsistency in the courtly doctrine, That the people are wholly unqualified for judging of political matters, and that therefore their sense in petitions, remonstrances, and instructions, is not to be regarded. If so, why is the choice of members of parliament left to the people? Why should not the ministry nominate them at once? If the people are incapable of judging of politics, they are incapable of judging of the qualifications of members. But to set this absurdity in its full light, it is to be observed, that the courtiers, at the same time they argue for the incapacity of the people in generals insist that the election of legislators is best trusted to the most incapable part of the people. Similar to which ingenious reasoning is their plea, when they tell us, 'The people are in fault, why do they let themselves be bribed by the court? So every town-rake cries out against the frailty of women (himself the cause of the failure of female virtue.) And because the people are liable to be corrupted, our courtiers insist, that the election of law-makers is best in the hands of that part of the people who are most liable to be corrupted. Into such absurdities do men plunge themselves, when they undertake the defence of what their understandings add consciences revolt against!
  In the remarkable answer of lord Percival, member for Westminster, to instructions sent him by his constituents a, we have that gentleman's notion of the duty of representatives in respect of instructions. And he speaks the sense of too many.
Some argue, that members of parliament are not obliged to obey instructions of their constituents, because the constituents do not hear the debates, and therefore cannot be supposed judges of the matter to be voted. But the lords may send votes by proxy, tho' they do not hear the debates. The very truth is, that the members have no opportunity of being at all better judges of most matters to be voted in parliament than men of understanding and reading, who never sat in the house. So that the hearing of the debates gives no such mighty advantage to the members above the constituents. Besides, there is nothing to hinder a member's informing his constituents of the reasons (occurring in the course of the debate) why he intends to vote so, or so. If they allow them, all is well. If he votes contrary to their direction, though he means their real interest, he only shews himself a wrongheaded agent, who will act according to his own opinion in spite of his masters; and ought, besides being immediately turned out of his office, to be answerable for all damages.
The excellent Davenant, 'tis true, lays no great stress on responsibility in members of parliament. But this is only because in his times they had few examples of parliaments so corrupted as* to come to have an interest different from that of their constituents. But in our degenerate times, when we know, that parliaments may be effectually drawn away from consulting the interest of their representatives, it is strange that judge Blackstone ( who writes what; have quoted from him above, p. 179) should write as follows.
  Suppose then a majority of the house of commons, corrupted by a villainous court, should propose to lay an exorbitant tax upon the people. Suppose the majority of the constituents, and people of England, should instruct the majority of the members against this tax, could the act establishing this tax, passed in direct opposition to the mind of the people of England, (which judge Blackstone's doctrine allows), be said to be, in any sense, constitutional, or parliamentary, or in any degree more tolerable to a free people, than if the king in council had pretended to impose the tax? If the votes of the electors be the whole and sole foundation of the authority, the members have to sit, and to make laws, can it be conceived, that the electors gave this authority on purpose to plunder themselves?
  If the members of the house of commons are not obliged to regard she instructions of their constituents; the people of this country chuse a set of despots every seven years, and are as perfect slaves as the turks, excepting the few months of a general election. And it is the trumping up of this doctrine, that gave Voltaire the hint to write, that the English are only free Once in seven years, and then they have not the sense to make the proper use of their freedom. Pudet hœc approbria, &c. That a Frenchman should have it in his power to tarn English liberty thus to ridicule, is mortifying enough; but that an English judge should support his contempt of our liberty, is still more humiliating. 
  But how could the spirit of liberty be expected to breathe in the works of a gentleman, who speaking of the just vengeance, which a frantic tyrant, the destroyer of liberty, and butcher of his subjects, brought upon himself, uses such expression as -- ' the infamous and unparalleled trial of king Charles I. Let the reader peruse the incomparable Mrs. Macaulay's history of his horrid reign, or indeed any, even that of his professed apologist Clarendon, and determine whether exempting him from the guilt of tyranny, it is possible to fix it on any prince that ever disgraced a throne, or filled a kingdom with confusion and bloodshed. As a friend to human nature, I cannot help declaring my opinion, that had he been guilty of no crime besides his offering the Scotch army a bribe of four counties, and the plunder of London, to invade England, or had he been guilty of no instance of tyranny besides his sighting and slaughtering his subjects about his over-strained prerogative had he had as many heads as the Lernean hydra, he ought to have lost them all. Nor can I, in reading judge Blackstone Commentaries, help samenting, that a writer, whose admirable work will be read as long as England, its laws, and language remain, should be so sparingly tinctured with the true and generous principles of liberty, on the support and prevalency of which, the glory of the British empire depends.
THE doctrine so much preached of late, by our speech-makers and courtly writers, that members of parliament are not obliged to regard the instructions of their constituents, is a mere innovation. In former times their receiving wages-supposed an obligation to do the business of those who paid them, and that they were to do it in the manner their employers chose it should be done. 
  Our ancestors (hewed themselves to be constituents, by finding, imprisoning, and incapacitating their members, when they acted contrary to their intention. Absentees were fined 20 a large sum in those days. Our members are our masters, and insist on a dictatorial independency on us for 7 years, and to give no account of their conduct at the 7 years end, nor have we any power over them, but that of not re-electing them to a new parliament, if they have betrayed us in the last. Nay, the majority of the members command their own election, and sit in parliament, as the peers, for life. And yet we are a free people. Well may the neighbouring nations admire so mysterious a system.
The knights hesitated about granting Edw III supplies, till they had the consent of their constituents. The barons agreed. There is no mention of the burgesses. They desired, that there might be a new parliament summoned, which might come prepared with authority from their constituents. The commons did not presume to grant Edw III any tax, till they consulted their constituents. The commons, in the time of Rich II being desired to grant a subsidy, soon after Tylers insurrection.
  It was enacted 1 Hen V at the petition of the commons, that none, but residents in the places they represented, should be chosen knights, citizens or burgesses. They had not then invented the refinements of our times, that the members are representatives for the whole kingdom, and from the moment of their election, are alike independent on their particular constituents, and on the whole body of electors through the kingdom.
  Milton and Locke bring very substantial arguments for calling even kings, with all their sacred majesty, their jure divino, and their impeccability (kings can do no wrong) to account, if they govern in any manner inconsistent with the good of the people. How much more lords, or commons, who have never even challenged to themselves any divine atributes? James I owned himself to be the great servant of the state. 
The qualifications of a member of parliament, according to the author of an excellent tract published in the beginning of this century, intituled, Reasons For Annual Parliaments, are sense, courage, and integrity. By sense, he means chiefly knowledge of the interests of England (though classical learning and fluency in haranguing are in our times essentially necessary) commerce, manufactures, liberty, securities and violations of the people, and redress; resources for war and peace, and connections with other .states, balance of power, &c. Courage against the encroachments of a court, against solicitations, places, preferments, threats, cabals, &c. Integrity not merely to the whigs, or to the minority, but to the nation. No man ought to be chosen, that (Will not receive instruction. There are no counties and few towns that do not understand the interest of their country enough to give general instructions. This was written 1702, when the people were not so knowing, and .consequently not so well qualified for instructing, as now. He insists that parliament be instructed to promote a militia, and to encourage the use of firelocks among the populace, to increase the navy, and reduce our wars to naval wholly.
  Thus we spoil our kings and queens. It was not the least condescension. It is the duty of every sovereign to pay the most profound the most sacred attention to the sense of the people, for whose benefit alone he is endowed with power.
We find in our histories nothing more frequent than instructions from constituent bodies to their representatives in parliament, which {hews, that the people (whose opinion, indeed in modern times, is little regarded by their governors, whereas it ought to be followed implicitly) think they have a right to instruct, and that their representatives ought to regard their instructions.
There were sent up instructions from all parts, in the same year, for an effectual place and pension-bill, and for short parliaments, and against a standing army, and all needless expences, by which taxes were increased.
  In the year 1742, the lord mayor and corporation of London instructed their members (on occasion of a disappointment from some pretended patriots) requiring their faithful attention to the prosecution of whatever might give hopes of redress. These instructions were followed by others to the same purpose front Westminster, Bristol, Edinburgh, York, Worcester, and other places.
The city of London instructed their representative A D 1769, to endeavour to prevent all attempts to the disadvantage of trial by jury; to watch over the observance of the Habeas Corpus act; the application of the public money to bribery or electioneering; to oppose the dangerous doctrine of constructive treasons, the garbling of petitions, and turning them into accusations; the use of military force on pretence of keeping the peace; to oppose the indiscriminate demands of ministers on pretence of paying civil list debts; to promote an effectual place-bill; to propose laws for preventing the influence of peers in elections, and for subjecting the candidate, as well as the elector, to the bribery oath; and to endeavour to obtain short parliaments and election by ballot, &c. 
When king William, A D 1694, refused the royal assent to the famous bill for free and impartial proceedings in parliament, the commons remonstrated, and the committee proposed, among other particulars, to address the following to his majesty.
IN the debate upon the motion for repealing the septennial act, A D 1734, Sir W. Wyndham opposed Sir W. Young, who had endeavoured to depriciate the necessity of responsibility.
Though it should be affirmed, that a member of parliament is not responsible to his own constituents, yet it would be strange to assert, that all the members may neglect the remonstrance of all the constituents in England to the same purpose. In that case, the members could not be said to be representatives of the people of England, but must be considered as a set of absolute despots, acting for their own private interest. But this is inconsistent with the very idea of election, or of delegated power. And if one member is not responsible, neither is another. If one is responsible, all arc. If revolution-principles are justifiable, that is, if the people may take the power out of the hands of a king, or government, when they abuse it, it follows, that the king and government are in all cases responsible to the people, and that a majority of the people can at any time change the government. This is not denying the danger and trouble of revolutions, nor the difficulty of determining what is the sense of the majority of the people. But if members of parliament are not obliged to regard instructions from, their constituents, what is to become of a poor town, or country-place, unable to bear a tax no way grievous to other wealthier places? The house receives no petitions upon money-bills; because every place either sends a member or members of its own, or. is represented by the county-members. But, if the house is neither to be informed by petition nor by instruction, how is it to be informed? This leaves an open door for the most cruel oppression.
  So far from questioning the responsibility of members, I should think it reasonable and proper to demand an oath of the members at their taking their seats, besides the usual oaths; I mean an oath of fidelity to their constituents, by which they should declare before God and men, that they come into the house by the free and uninfluenced choice of a true majority of those, who by law have the right of choice; and that they will, in all their speeches and votes, faithfully and zealously pursue their country's good, in spite of all temptation to the contrary. The most incorrupt parliament ought not to refuse giving their constituents all the security in their power. An honest man does not refuse to. give his bond. The most virtuous are the most desirous of avoiding suspicion, and the most anxious about standing in a clear light before the world.
The history of mankind for two or three thousand years backwards (which is as far backwards as history goes) is a sermon upon this text, Nothing more dangerous than power without responsibility. But the species resembles an individual. As the father's experience does not make the son wiser, so neither does the history of the sufferings of former generations teach the succeeding to secure themselves against the mischiefs of unaccountable power.
The tyranny of the East Indie governors, who, on account of the distance of their situation from the seat of government, think themselves in a manner out of its reach; shews how dangerous it is to trust power without responsibility.
  A few years ago, the wise justices of Westminster gave for one night a discretionary power to the constables to apprehend and secure all street-walking women. What was the consequence? Those imperious brutes took up a number of industrious washerwomen going to their business before day-light, crammed them into a place of confinement like the black hole at Calcutta, in which one, or more, were fairly suffocated, and found dead next morning.
  See a British house of commons plundering the people of above half a million to pay court-debts, A D 1773, at the same time examining with great severity into the plunderings committed in Asia by the East India company's servants; the accusers and the accused alike guilty, because alike secure, as they imagined, from question. Thus the poet of nature represents lady Macbeth encouraging her husband to murder his sovereign under his own roof, by the consideration, that there was no body who dared to call them to account. .
  In other countries, we find a connexion held between representation and responsibility.
The tribunes of the people, in the times of the commonwealth of Rome, had no will of their own. They were the mere speaking-trumpet of the people. And had the people been regularly formed into districts, in such manner as to prevent the corrupt populace of that great city from carrying every point by mobbing, all would have been well.
The Procuradores, or members for Castile, in the corte held at Madrid, in the beginning of Charles V. excused themselves from granting the supplies he desired, because they had received no orders from their constituents; and afterwards receiving express orders not to do it, they gave Charles a flat denial. 
The same was the custom in France, before that country was enslaved. The general assemblies being laid aside, the same custom is still [latter end of the 17th century] used in the lesser assemblies of the states in Languedoc and Bretagne. The same is observed by the deputies of the cities of Germany to the diets.
The deputies or members of the parliament of Paris, when all France was like to be ruined by the confusions in the minority of Lewis XIV were afraid to sign a compromise for restoring the public quiet, lest their constituents should not approve of the terms. Our deputies are not afraid to approve the measures of the court, though they know them to be the execration of their constituents.  
  Before the people of Ireland obtained a limitation of the time of their parliaments, they instructed their members, and many places went so far as to demand of them, before election, an oath, that they would vote for the measure.
The deputies sent by each of the United Provinces to the States General are responsible only to the respective provinces which fend them, and not to the States General. In England our members do not hold themselves responsible to their constituents, but to the house, and the house to the prime minister. Thus the people, who ought to be all, are nothing. The f\sagacious Dutch have guarded against the danger of lodging too irresponsible a power in the hands of their supreme assembly, or giving their deputies leave to sell them. The States General cannot, without the unanimous consent of all the provinces (who are too numerous to be bribed) make peace, nor war, nor raise troops, nor make laws affecting the whole republic. Nor can they repeal an antient statute or regulation, nor elect a stadholder, otherwise than at the risque of their heads, which they accordingly hazarded for the public good, A D 1668, when, to check the growing power of Lewis XIV at the instance of Sir W. Temple, they signed the triple alliance, and elected the prince of Orange stadtholder, through fear of danger from slow counsels.
The people of New England keep up the right of instructing their members.
IN consequence of the inadequate state of parliamentary representation, the house of commons has assumed such a superiority over its constituents (and indeed, the burgesses of the meaner boroughs, who, as has been seen, have the credit of electing the majority of the house, are a set of very contemptible people, scarce capable of electing, or of instructing) that, despising the thought of being answerable to them, they arrogate certain privileges never granted by the people, and assume the power of protecting, excluding, expelling their own members, of deciding their own causes, prosecuting, arresting, imprisoning, reprimanding, and fining their employers at their arbitrary pleasure, and according to I know not what lex et conjuetuod parliaments which tramples on Magna Charta, and the Bill of Rights.
Privilege and pre-emminence of every kind is invidious, and odious to the people. Whoever wanted to excite the Roman people against the senate, never failed to mention the law forbidding marriage between the patricians and plebeians. Even where privilege fs bestowed in consequence of merit, it is but aukwardly brooked.
 All privilege is a nuisance, whose extent is unknown; because the subject is thereby in danger of falling into undesigned offence. But it has always been made a point to keep the extent of parliamentary privilege, prerogative royal, ministerial power, &c profound secret. These are the arcana imperii , in English, tricks of state. But does the concealment of what may be dangerous to the people, shew, in government, a paternal tenderness for the people? And is that government any thing better than a tyranny, which shews a want of paternal tenderness for the people? The truth is, our ministers chuse to secure a small convenience to themselves (the convenience of keeping the people in fear of them) tho' at the risque of great loss to the subjects.
The only use of parliamentary privilege from arrest, is to prevent a tyrant, or a corrupt court, from imprisoning, on pretence of debt, or distressing, such members as opposed their measures. But this might have been sufficiently provided against, without carrying privilege to such an unreasonable length, that there should be no time of the year, when a member, and his dependents, should be obliged to pay their debts.
  It is well observed by an eminent lawyer in his speech in parliament, That the privileges of the members of the house of commons might be said to be those of the people, if the members of the house of commons had no interest different from that of the people, which he affirms, is the very contrary of the truth.
This resolution puts an end to all enquiry into the behaviour of our trustees, and makes it impossible for us to call them to account, or to know, whether it will be safe to re-elect them or not There is somewhat particularly gross and mean-spirited in stopping enquiry. It always suggests the idea of somewhat, which will not bear enquiring into. "I care not, says the honest old philosopher, if there were a window in my breast, that any body might look in. and see what is pasting in my thoughts." Felony, breach of the peace, and treason, deprive a member of his privilege a. And the commons lately gave up privilege in case of seditious libels. Thus we see' them magnifying privilege against the people, and lowering it in servile complaisance to the court; directly contrary to what the spirit of liberty would dictate. 
  Sir Charles Sedley observes, in his speech, A D 1699 that when complaint was made, that great part of the revenue remained unaccounted for, in the hands of the receivers, a member answered, It could not be helped; for that those receivers were members, and stood upon their privilege. Nor is it to be wondered that they should; since every 100,000 of the publick money kept back, yields 4000  a year interest; and a great officer of the state, whose department lies among the finances, may keep in his own hands many such sums for many years. But this is pocketing what belongs to the public, and is as honest as it would be to steal sixpence a-piece out of 100,000 pockets. 
There seems to be a small inconsistency between the qualification act and the privilege of members against arrest for debt. The former says, No man shall be member for a county, if he has not 600 a year clear, nor for a city or borough, unless he has 300. But the privilege supposes, that a member may be unable to pay his debts; and, in that case, provides against his being arrested, to the great inconvenience and loss of those, who have trusted members. Now, if it be improper that a needy man be a member of  the house of commons, why must this needy man be privileged against arrests?! Why should not the bailiffs have him, and another be elected in his room? If it be said, the arrest may be litigious; it may be the contrivance of a villainous minister, to put a friend to liberty out-of the way on a critical occasion; the answer is short. Let the house of commons bail the arrested member, if they understand this to be the case; if not, let him be given up to his creditors. This would equally secure the member against ministerial tricks, and the creditor against abuse of privilege. It is criminal in any man to contract debts, which it is improbable he should ever be able to pay. It is criminal to protect such  a debtor. Which doctrine, by the way, condemns all our too daring merchant, bankers, &c, who take whatever credit they can have in consequence of the too easy credulity of mankind, and extend their adventures, by which only themselves can be gainers, at the peril of hundreds, who may be undone by them. But a member of parliament, a legislator, ought not to be supposed capable of ever coming into such circumstances, as to be liable to arrest for a just debt; or if he does, he ought to be left to the same law with other bankrupts. Where then is the honest use of this parliamentary screen? For it is to be observed, that privilege screens a member 40 days before and 40 days after the sitting of the house, against arrest for the most just debt, and for all sorts of offences, that do not come up to felony, breach of the peace, treason, or seditious libels.
  A D 1541, the commons begun privileging from arrest for debt by writ from the speaker. In former times, it was done by writ from the chancellor.
  It is plain, that all the privileges assumed by members of parliament are not necessary for the public service, whatever they may be for their pride for they have often been dispensed with. An act was made, A D 1641, for laying down the privileges of parliament for a session, because the citizens complained that they lost money by them.
The freemen and citizens of London, in their petition to parliament, A D 1646, complain of many members, who stand upon privilege, and refuse to pay their debts.
  An order was made, A D 1647, that no Persons under authority of parliament, but the members, shall have protection or immunity by reason of privilege, nor any member be free from action or prosecution, but obliged to answer. Only their persons not liable to arrest.
  In the year 1647, the commons ordered, that from January 20th of that year, none but members should, during that session, have protection by privilege of the house, in any suit; and that the estates of members be liable for debt, &c. And the same year, the peers gave up those lords, who by reason of their offences, had not liberty to sit in parliament, to be prosecuted by suits of law, and likewise their attendants, as if there were no parliament.
Privilege of members, as to person and estate, was taken off, A D 1649.
The lord mayor, aldermen, and commons, A D, 1646, complained to parliament, that many were sufferers by protection of privilege; they complained of jealousies fomented between parliament and city, and their mayor suspended; desire that the debts due by parliament to the city may be put in course of payment. The Lords answer with great acknowledgements of the important services of the city, which they promise never to forget; and to do every thing in their power for redressing the complaints of the citizens, and particularly of the lord mayor, of whom they speak ,very highly. Commons give it a very cold reception. Ludlow, in his Memoirs, calls the petition an insolent address, and the commons' answer, a declaration that they would preferve their authority and not be dictated to.
  A standing order of the house was published, A D 1739, against members giving protections. 
The commons, A D 1678, put a stop to all protections granted by members to any but menial servants actually in service. A great grievance by abuse of privilege.
  A good act was made, A D 1701, for explaining parliamentary privilege, which was a great nuisance, obstructing the course of justice, and preventing the demand of just debts from year to year; for the lessions of parliament being prorogued from period to period, the whole year round was a time of privilege. So natural is it to overstretch power in our own favour. Dodderidge traces privilege for the servants of members back to 8 Hen VI.
A D.1707, Asgill, a member, was in debt. His creditors petitioned the house, that he may not be defended by privilege from paying a just debt. It happened that Asgiil had written a silly pamphlet about the possibility of going to heaven without dying. The house took the opportunity of this pamphlet to expel him, on the statute of blasphemy, I suppose, without either violating privilege, or screening a bad man from paying his just debts. Why should not all privileges both of lords and commons, be put on this footing, that no member of either house be liable to arrest, but with consent of the house, and the house always to consent, unless when the cause is litigious or unjust?
When it was moved, that letters of members go free during the sitting of the house, Sir Heneage Finch said it was a beggarly proposal. The lords left out the provision, and the commons agreed.
  A D 1690, Mr. Montague was charged in execution for 5078. He was at the same time elected member. The house of commons was puzzled, whether he could be received. But they found precedents in the proceeding parliament, and that lord Coke, affirms, that all persons are eligible, except aliens, minors, and persons attainted of treason or felony . It is, however to be remembered, that noblemen, clergymen, women, lunatics, commissioners of customs, and several other placemen, are not eligible; and that a member for a county must have a qualification of 600 a year, and for a city or borough 300  a year. But the Scotch, and universities are exempted from qualifications.
  Sir Thomas Shirley, a member, was imprisoned for debt in the time of Jam I. The serjeant at arms was sent to the Fleet by the house to demand him. The warden refuses? The commons send for the warden, and commit him to the Tower. A dispute arose, whether the house's imprisoning the warden, could indemnify him, in case of his prisoner's escaping, during his absence. Some proposed to send, and break open the prison, and bring away Sir Thomas by force. [A whimsical application, surely, of legislative power.] The speaker overruled this motion; telling the house, that it would be actionable. After much debating, they sent for the warden again, and put him into the dungeon called Little ease. The warden offers to release Sir Thomas if two members will be security for the debt. The house refuses. At last they privately desire the king to order the warden, on his allegiance, to release Sir Thomas. 
Mr. Ferrers, member for Plymouth, was arrested for debt, A D 1542, going to parliament, and carried to the Counter. The serjeant of the commons was sent to the Counter to fetch him. The people at the counter resisted the serjeant, who complained to the sheriffs. They took part with their officers. The serjeant returned to the House, and informed them. The commons resent highly. They rose, and went to the house of lords, to whom they related the affair. The lords and judges declared the contempt very atrocious, and referred the punishment to the commons, who returned to their house, and sent their serjeant to the sheriffs with his mace, without a writ though the chancellor offered them one. In the mean while the sheriffs resolved to change their scheme, and deliver up Mr. Ferrers to the serjeant. The commons ordered the sheriffs to attend them, with the clerks and officers of the Counter. They likewise ordered their serjeant to take into custody White,tihe person who had arrested him. The sheriffs and White were sent to the Tower, the clerk of the Counter to a place, in the same prison, called Little ease, and the. officer who arrested Mr. Ferrers, and four others to Newgate, who were not set at liberty, till the lord mayor petitioned for them. Was this contest suitable to the dignity of the house of commons?  A battle between the gaolers of the Counter, and the representatives (such they ought to be) of the greatest people in Europe!
  It is notorious, that from time immemorial, the house of .commons has assumed to itself a power of trying, condemning, and punishing, in cases, where itself is the offended party, and often in a very arbitrary manner, and Without due regard to the standing laws of the land. An assembly of representatives elected in an adequate manner, and holding their power a competent time, and upon the foundation of responsibility to constituents, would not have fallen into this error.
Therefore offending subjects are to be tried at law, and not by parliament. It is not by a power of apprehending and imprisoning, that the dignity of parliament is to be kept up, any more than the credit of religion by fire and faggot. On the contrary, these violences necessarily bring both into contempt, because they suppose, that they are not sufficient for their own support without these unnatural helps. Let your religion be rational, and your parliament incorrupt, and they will defy abuse. Who ever heard of the venerable court of Areopagus, or the more venerable one of the Amphictyons, sending out their serjeant at arms to apprehend the writers of pamphlets against them?
  It seems strange, that a part of the legislature should shew so little respect for the laws, as to let up its own unknown and hasty resolutions as a better rule of conduct for judges, &c. than the known solemn acts of the whole parliament. Yet we often see them doing so. Sir Francis Pemberton, judge of the court of kings bench, had over-ruled a plea of an order of the house of commons, A D 1689, for arresting certain persons, and defended his proceeding; for that it was according to law b. Resolved, That the judgments given by Pemberton, Jones, &c. are illegal, and a violation of the rights of parliament, and that a bill be brought in to reverse those judgments. Another case of the same kind relating to a judgment of the court of king's bench on information against Williams, speaker of the house of commons, for matters done by order of the house, was resolved illegal, and against the freedom of parliament, and that a bill be brought in to reverse it. Pemberton and Jones were examined again, and put in custody of the serjeant at arms. Judge Berkley was taken off of his bench in Westminster-Hall, A D 1640, by the usher of the black rod, to the great terror of his brethren. In those days the house of commons was venerable, as being known to act according to the general sense of the people. Therefore the people did not grudge them any degree of power. In corrupt times, when the people see their pretended representatives acting constantly in obedience to a designing court they wish their power retrenched, though the retrenching of the power of the house of commons is not the proper means for redressing the evil; but cutting off the communication between it and the court; of which more in the sequel. 
The following instances shew what power has been formerly allowed our parliaments, when the people had a confidence in them. A D 1680, Scroggs was impeached of treason. Great question was made, whether he could be accused of treason, or of high crimes and misdemeaners only. It was argued, that parliament may punish as treason any crime tending to the destruction of the nation, though not declared to be treason by 25 Edw III. Trestlian and his accomplices were condemned in parliament for crimes not before declared felony, by any promulgated law, Empsom and Dudley the same. Finch and Berkley were condemned by parliament of treason for the same crimes as those charged on Scroggs, &c. The judges in Richard lI's time were condemned for giving extrajudicial opinions. A knight of Cheshire was condemned for conspiring the death of the king's uncle. An earl of Northumberland for giving liveries to so many that they were thought a little army. None of these were declared felony by any previous statute.
  The commons, however, made a bad use of the people's confidence, and began to use their power in a tyrannical and oppressive manner. Accordingly the judicious writer of a piece, entitiled, The Subjects Right of Petitioning (which was written on occasion of the commons imprisoning the Kentish petitioners, A D 1701) observes, that great numbers of other subjects had been imprisoned by them-the same session, to the horror and amazement of all those, who knew the rights and liberties of the people of England; and therefore could not but be concerned to see them so miserably infringed; and that it  was necessary, in order to prevent such acts of power for the future, to shew, that they were mere acts of power, and manifest encroachments on the rights and liberties of the people. He shews, that the common law was formerly so tender of the subject's liberty, that it suffered none to be imprisoned, but for violence and breach of the peace. The lords brought in the custom of imprisoning 35 Hen III by the Stat Marlbr for obliging bailiffs, or collectors of rents, to make up their accounts. Afterwards, 23 Edw III it was enacted, that debtors should be compelled by imprisonment to pay their debts. But if a debtor died in prison, the debt was paid. And by 1 Edw II no one was to be punished for breaking prison, forasmuch as one is warranted to do it by the law of nature,' says the Mirror. By Magna Charta, no free man shall be taken, or imprisoned, but by judgment of his peers, or the law of the land; which is explained by 25 Edw. III to be a security against imprisonment by petition or suggestion to the king or his council, or in any other way than due course of law [no mention of a vote of the House of Commons.] It is certain, says that writer, that men, imprisoned by the commons, underwent no judgment of their peers, were not committed by any legal process, or by any law, that we know in this land. He insists, that the commons have no right to imprison any, but their own members, and that only when absolutely necessary. The members know this power of the house, and voluntarily expose themselves to it, by going into the house; which other subjects do not; but claim- the privilege given them by Magna Charta. He owns, likewise, that there may be some pretence for imprisoning persons not members, when guilty of breach of privilege, or contempt. [In which I think he makes too large a concession; see not the justice, nor even the common decency of any set of men whatever (I am of opinion the two houses of parliament are but men) punishing any offence against themselves. There is no possible case, in which jury may not decide. Confinement by the commons alone, he observes, is an encroachment on the legislature, which consists of king, lords, and commons. The commons sending the subjects to prison, even though guilty, is assuming the office of the executive, which belongs to the king, the commons being of the legists lathe only. A power in the commons of imprisoning is a mockery, he thinks, of the people's liberty; because a free people ought to be liable to no punishment, but in consequence of some known standing law. Judges, and justices of the peace have a power of imprisoning in consequence of their being impowered by the king to execute the laws, which the commons are not. The commons have no need of a power to punish, because they may apply to the executive whenever a known law is violated. [Even the Joveraine cannot punish an offence against himself. The offender is tried, and condemned by indifferent persons, viz judges and juries.] The house of commons has no power to decide concerning property; how then, he says, can it take away personal liberty, which is more valuable? He says, the power of imprisoning was but just then assumed by the commons, and could not plead custom, or prescription. Too great a power in the house of commons, he says, may produce great mischief many ways; particularly by disgusting the people against parliamentary government, and driving them to such a proceeding as that of the Danes, who, to be free from the tyranny of. their lords, made themselves staves to their king. When there is reason, he says, to suspect a great prevalency of bribery and corruption in the house of commons, it is time for the people to see to the retrenching of their power; [the cutting off of court influence, he should have said] for that a corrupt house of commons may be expected to make themselves formidable to the people, in order to be of consequence to the court, and to deserve the more liberal pay. 
  No set of men empowered only to make laws, can, without an express commission from the people, alter the confusion, because it is only upon the principles of the constitution, that they had their power entrusted to them; and the principles of the constitution will never bear them out in overthrowing the constitution. The people, whose original and inherent power established the constitution, may change the constitution, or empower a set of men to change it.
Writers on the side of this assumed boundless parliamentary privilege, by accustoming themselves to think of the house of commons as the representative of the people, fall into the mistake, that whatever is right for the one is right for the other likewise, and that whatever the people's power reaches to, is likewise within the reach of the assembly of representatives. And this is generally, speaking, true. But there is a distinction to be made. The people have certain incommunicable powers, which their representatives can upon no occasion challenge to themselves. The people alone can elect representatives. The whole body of representatives have not in themselves the power to take into, to exclude, or to expel from their house one single member, otherwise than according to notorious and stated laws made by the whole legislative power, and assented to by the people. This may be explained by comparing it with the king's power of commissioning embassadors for foreign courts; which power is incommunicably inherent in him, in such manner, that all the embassadors employed by the king cannot by any power of their own send an embassador to, or dismiss, or expel one from the most inconsiderable court. Yet every embassador, when furnished with his credentials, has the power of representing the king his master's person at the court to which he is sent, in all those matters and things which enter into the function of an embassador. Again, the people alone have the power of determining for how long a period they will continue their representatives in office. The assembly of representatives have not power to continue their own authority one day beyond the time, for which they were elected. If they have, they may, at any time, erect themselves into peers, and insist on keeping their seats for life. Again, an assembly of representatives have no power to assume to themselves any unprecedented privilege; but the people have power to confer on their representatives what privileges they please, to limit them as they please, and even to new-model the whole government.
  In the case of a court of directors, established by a trading company, it is universally understood, that the directors, when once established by the proprietors, have power to do whatever the proprietors could do for the common advantage of the company, this power being still left to the explication and limitation of the proprietors. But, when a director dies, or resigns, the court of directors cannot put another in his place. This is the incommunicable privilege of the proprietors. Nor can the directors lengthen, beyond the intention of their constituents, the time for which they were appointed. Nor can they assume to themselves any one power or privilege, different from those given them by the proprietors. Nor can they refuse a duly elected director, nor take in one of their own chusing, nor expel one chosen by the proprietors, otherwise than according to the laws of the company, and the powers originally reposed in them. Nor can they alter any thing fundamental in the constitution of the company; but the proprietors can; so far as to the total dissolution of the incorporate body. Therefore, when Mr. Prynne was threatened by Sir H. Vane and Sir A. Baselrig, to be voted out of the house of commons, A D 1659, he answered.
  As.to the power assumed by the house, of sending for persons, papers, and records, and of reprimanding fining, imprisoning offenders, it has long been questioned, and never rightly established. 
When the commons, in the third parliament under Ch II imprisoned, too arbitrarily, many of the abhorrers, or court party, the clamour turned against them, and one Stowel stood on the defensive against the serjeant, when he came to apprehend him, saying, The commons bad no law for imprisoning. He got the better. And the commons, to save their authority, dropped the matter, and granted Stowel a month to recover from an indisposition, which he had not.
  It is manifestly an irregularity for the house of commons, which is only a third part of the legislature, take to itself singly the executive power. The power of the house ( as being no court of judicature (to examine witnesses, was questioned by the lords, A D 1732. Though the commons had always claimed that power, yet it was a point still in dispute between the two houses. It was argued, that the commons had delegated that power to their committees. That members, who were justices of the peace, could administer the oath to the witnesses, for which their was precedent. That that house was a court of record, and as such they certainly had a power to administer an oath, in any affair that came properly before them. But being unwilling to have any dispute with the lords, the debate was dropped. There is no statute law, by which a constitutional power is given to the house of commons to order a paper to be burnt, and the sheriffs to attend and see it done. That they have assumed this power from time immemorial, is undoubted.
   The king's bench goes on, however, the same year, bailing by Habeas Corpus, persons obnoxious to the commons. The commons order the governor of the Tower to bring before them in custody of their serjeant at arms, Sir Thomas Jenner and others, tho* bailed before the warrant could reach them. Not giving satisfaction, on their examination before the house, a committee is appointed to prepare a charge against them. The governor of the Tower is ordered to bring before the commons several lords, and others. The commons prepare impeachments against them. They order several others into custody. At the same time that the commons consulted safety, they punished cruelty. They ordered Richardson, keeper of Newgate, to be prosecuted for cruelty to his prisoners.
  In the affair of the printers in 1770, it was argued in the house of commons, that the power of summoning persons before them, and punishing for refusal, is necessary for preferving the purity of elections; because, if every returning officer may proceed as he pleases, and laugh at the house of commons, there must be an end of all due election and return. But we know that many matters relating to elections arc now allowed to be cognizable in the courts of law. Why should not all? Why should the house of commons concern themselves with any thing, but their great objects, viz legislation, raising supplies, and enquiring into the conduct of ministers? One thing we all know, relating to this affair, viz That if the commons would go on with their own business, and leave the decision of elections, and breaches of their own privileges, to the inferior courts, magnanimously declining.to be judges in their own cause, and having nothing to do with any man, till he comes to take his seat, and has satisfied the house, that either his election was never questioned, or if questioned, was legally decided, as any other difference between man and man; it is, I say, notorious, that if this was the sexet consuetudo parliaments there would be no opportunity for the reflections now so commonly cast upon our house of commons, as deciding elections too much, in favour of the court-candidate, and as taking upon themselves the inconsistent offices of plaintiffs, judges, and juries. 
Judge Blackstone, in his account of the unknown and unlimited power and privileges of parliament, seems to forget, that the safety of the people limits all free governments. It is true that the people of England, not being accustomed, till lately, to apprehend danger from any quarter, but the throne (tyranny having been an old trick among kings from Nimrod's time down) have all along encouraged and supported their parliaments in extending their power, as the only sure bulwark against regal encroachments. But latter ages have taught us the necessity of looking out for security against parliamentary encroachments. And, the method is not by lessening the power of parliament, but by lessening the power of the court over the parliament. For a parliament is not (as a king) naturally hostile to liberty. If ever a parliament comes to oppose, or injure the people, it must be in consequence of an unnatural influence acting in it. Therefore our modern male-contents seem to be in a wrong pursuit. To retrench the power of their representatives, would be lessening their own power. To break through the corrupt influence of the court over their representatives, would be making them truly their representatives. Take away court-influence, and the will of course pursue the interest of their country, as any other set of gentlemen would do, because their own will be involved in it, when they have no places or pensions to indemnify them. At the same time it cannot be denied, that for a house of commons, though ever so incorrupt and uninfluenced by the court, to be ever grasping at new privileges, and assuming new powers, descending from the dignity of representatives of the majesty of the people of Britain, taking upon themselves the office of the justices, prosecuting, imprisoning, and fining, a set of printers and booksellers, depriving his subjects of his trial by jury, and employing their time in hunting out small offenders, while they should be battling the gigantic enemies of liberty and virtue, and planning measures for making unborn millions happy; it cannot be denied, I say, that such proceedings as these are infinitely beneath the attention of a house of commons, though it should be granted, that the power of the house of commons, being the power of the people, ought not to be limited. All thing are lawful for them; but all things are not expedient. The truth of the matter is, That if our houses of commons had kept.to their proper sphere, we should never have seen any libels against them, nor any occasion for prosecuting, imprisoning, and fining; or if there had, the courts of king's bench and common pleas were open.
  Suppose a man had personally offended the majority of the individuals, who happen to compose a jury, that is to try him. Would not every body acknowledge, it would be great severity to refuse him the usual liberty of objecting to his jury? But suppose twelve men to commence a prosecution against one; and that those very individuals are immediately, in the very rage of their resentment, inclosed to pass a verdict, and determine of a punishment for an offence against themselves. Would this have the smallest semblance of justice? On the contrary, is it not the very design of law, to take out of the hands of the offended, the trial and punishment of the offenders, and put it into those of indifferent persons? But, when either house of parliament, or a court of justice punishes for breach of privilege, or contempt of court, the persons offended are the judges, and inflict the punishment.

