Disqusitions 1
Of Government, briefly.
IF there be, in any region of the universe, an order of moral agents living in society, whose reason is strong, whose passions and inclinations are moderate, and whose dispositions are turned to virtue, to such an order of happy beings, legislation, administration, and police, with the endlessly various and complicated apparatus of politics, must be in a great measure superfluous. Did reason govern mankind, there would be little occasion for any other government, either monarchical, aristocratical, democratical, or mixed. But man, whom we dignify with the honourable title of Rational, being much more frequently influenced, in his proceedings, by supposed interest, by passion, by sensual appetite, by caprice, by any thing, by nothing, than by reason; it
has, in all civilized ages and countries, been found proper to frame laws and statutes fortified by sanctions, and to establish orders of men invested with authority to execute those laws, and inflict the deserved punishments upon the violators of them. By such means only has it been found possible to preferve the general peace and tranquility. But, such is the perverse disposition of man, the most unruly of all animals, that this most useful institution has been generally debauched into an engine of oppression and tyranny over those, whom it was expressly and solely established to defend. And to such a degree has this evil prevailed, that in almost every age and country, the government has been the principal grievance of the people, as appears too dreadfully manifest, from the bloody and deformed page of history. For what is general history, but a view of the abuses of power committed by those, who have got it into their hands, to the subjugation, and destruction of the human species, to the ruin of the general peace and happiness, and turning the Almighty's fair and good world into a butchery of its inhabitants, for the gratification of the unbounded ambition of a few, who, in overthrowing the felicity of their fellow-creatures, have confounded their own?
  That government only can be pronounced consistent with the design of all government, which allows to the governed the liberty of doing what, consistently with the general good, they may desire to do, and which only forbids their doing the contrary. Liberty does not exclude restraint; it only excludes unreasonable restraint. To determine precisely how far personal liberty is compatible with the general good, and of the propriety of social conduct in all cases, is a matter of great extent, and demands the united wisdom of a whole people. And the consent of the whole people, as far as it can be obtained, is indispensably necessary to every law, by which the whole people arc to be bound; else the whole people are enslaved to the one, or the few, who frame the laws for them.
Were a colony to emigrate from their native land, and settle in a new country, on what would they propose to bestow their chief attention? On securing the happiness of the whole? or on the aggrandizement of the governor? If the latter, all mankind would pronounce those colonists void of common sense. But in every absolute monarchy, the aggrandizement of the governor is the supreme object; and the happiness of the people is to yield to it. Were only a handful of friends to form themselves into one of those little societies we call clubs; what would be their object? The advantage of the company, or the power of the chair-man?
ALL lawful authority, legislative, and executive, originates from the people. Power in the people is like light in the fun, native, original, inherent, and unlimited by any thing human. In governors, it may be compared to the reflected light of the moon; for it is only borrowed, delegated, and limited by the intention of the people, whose it is, and to whom governors are to consider themselves as responsible, while the people are answerable only to God; themselves being the losers, if they pursue a false scheme of politics. Of which more hereafter.
  As the people are the fountain of power, so are they the object of government, in such manner, that where the people are safe, the ends of government are answered, and where the people are sufferers by their governors, those governors have failed of the main design of their institution, and it is of no importance what other ends they may have answered.
  As the people are the fountain of power, and object of government, so are they the last resource, when governors betray their trust. And happy is that people, who have originally so principled their constitution, that they themselves can without violence to it, lay hold of its power, wield it as they please, and turn it, when necessary, against those to whom it was entrusted, and who have exerted it to the prejudice of its original proprietors. Of all which more copiously hereafter.
  Legem majejiatis reduxerat, &c. says Tacitus. The antient lex majejiatis among the Romans was intended against those who injured the state; and the majesty in defence of which it was made, was the majesty of the people. But Tiberius perverted that salutary law into a protection for tyrants. So our court-sycophants cry out, on every remonstrance against misgovernment, 'Treason! The king is 'betrayed', the nation 'is ruined,' while nobody but themselves has the least thought of hurting the king, nor of ruining any thing, but that which, if let alone, will ruin the nation.
Government naturally divides itself into legislative and executive. No degree of wisdom is more than sufficient for the former. For the latter, nothing but well regulated force is wanted. To compose a system of wife and good laws is the utmost effort of human sagacity. To carry on the affairs of a nation, in a long-beaten track, requires only common sense and common diligence.
The most natural and simple idea of government is that of the people's assembling together in their own persons, for consulting, debating, enacting laws, and forming regulations, according to which all are to conduct themselves, and by which the general liberty, property and safety are provided for. Accordingly this is the plan of government among the Indians in America, and other simple and uncultivated people; and is described by Cæsar, Tacitus, tec. as having been that of the antient Gauls, and Germans. 
  But such a scheme of government is thought only compatible with a small dominion. In great and populous countries, it being supposed impossible to assemble together, in a deliberative capacity, the whole body of the people, or even all the men of property, so as to avoid confusion, and to obtain the unconstrained opinion of a majority, it is thought necessary to have recourse to an adequate and freely elected representation. 
  It may be said, 'Why might not (in Britain for instance) the inhabitants of single counties meet together to deliberate on those subjects, which are now debated in parliament, and afterwards communicate the result of their consultation to a grand national assembly? The answer is, This would still be government by representation; because the national assembly must be the elected representatives of the people. Of all which more hereafter.
  In planning a government by representation, the people ought to provide against their own annihilation. They ought to establish a regular and constitutional method of acting by and from themselves, without, or even in opposition to their representatives, if necessary. Our ancestors therefore were provident; but not provident enough. They set up parliaments, as a curb on kings and ministers; but they neglected to referve to themselves a regular and constitutional method, of exerting their power in curbing parliaments, when necessary. Of which I shall have occasion to treat more fully in the sequel.
There is no advantage within the reach of a particular people, that may not be obtained by parliamentary government in as effectual a manner, as if every inhabitant of the country were to deliberate and vote in person. But this supposes parliament free from all indirect influence, and to have no interest separate from the general good of the commonwealth. In a country, like Britain, where a parliament is constitutionally the last resort, and where there lies no regular appeal to the people, the perversion of parliament from its original intention may prove utter ruin, as leaving no constitutional means of redress, and compelling the people to take into their own hands the dangerous work of vindicating their liberties by force; which, in the conclusion of jarring parties, may produce anarchy and end in tyranny. Of which more hereafter.
Nothing can be imagined more august than a numerous set of wise, free, and honest men sitting in consultation upon the means for securing the happiness of a whole people. Such was that most venerable antient assembly of the Amphiclyons, which was the general tribunal of Greece for judging and deciding all controversies among the several states. So great was the respect in which the decisions of that council were held, that their sentences were seldom, or never, disputed, and that grievous wars were often terminated by their arbitration. The several states of Greece, in number about twelve, sent each to this grand court one, two, or three delegates, according to their respective importance.
The Panœtolium of the antient Aetoliam seems to have been an assembly very much upon the plan of our house of commons. This convention met annually, or oftner, if necessity required. Representatives were sent to this assembly from all quarters, with instructions, from which they were not to deviate. In this Panatolium resided the whole majesty of the state. In it laws were made and repealed, alliances formed and renounced, peace and war declared, magistrates appointed, particularly the chief commander, for every year, e&c.
The antient Achaia was a confederacy of states, like our modern Holland or Switserland. Each of those little states had its possessions, territories, and boundaries; each had its senate, or assembly, its magistrates and judges; and every state sent deputies to the general convention, and had equal weight in all determinations. And most of the neighbouring states, which, moved by fear of danger, acceded to this confederacy, had reason to felicitate themselves.
The government of the antient commonwealths of Italy, before the Roman was formed, was much upon a free or parliamentary plan.
The Israelitish government was of the free, or parliamentary kind. The people's demanding a change of the form of their government into monarchical, was directly opposite to their constitution, and to the divine intention. Which, by the bye, shews the absurdity of the doctrine of regal government's being of divine original. Of which more elfewhere.
The republic of Lycia was a confederacy of towns, which they ranged into three classes according to their respective importance. To the cities of the first rank they allowed three votes each in the general council; to those of the second two, and to those of the third one. For reason taught them, that they, who have the most at stake, ought to have the greatest weight in all consultations concerning the common good.
  Sparta, as modelled by the good and wise Lycurgus, was a republican, or parliamentary government, though of a mixed kind; for there were kings, a senate elected by the people, and an assembly of the people, the. consent of which last was necessary to the establishment of a law, says Plutarch. Nor was this mixture an objection against the Spartan government's being of the free, or parliamentary kind. The Theban, the Dutch, the English, and other free, or parliamentary governments have all been of the mixed fort, having admitted kings, or stadtholders, or other chiefs. There has indeed hardly ever been known a pure commonwealth; though many an unmixed monarchy, or tyranny. The English republic, which was demolished by the villainous Cromwel, was one of the most unmixed, that ever was known. It was a true government by representation, of which more hereafter. In the mean while, now I am mentioning republican government, I take this opportunity of entering an express caveat against all accusations of a desire to establish republican principles. I do not think a friend to this nation is obliged to promote a change in the constitution. The present form of government by king, lords and commons, if it could be restored to its true spirit and efficiency might be made to yield all the liberty, and all the happiness, of which a great and good people are capable in this world. Therefore I do not think it worth while to hazard any considerable commotion for the fake merely of changing the constitution from limited monarchy to republican government, though I hardly know the risque it would not be worth while to run for the fake of changing our government from corrupt to incorrupt. But to return.
  Athens, as reformed by Solon, was a free, or parliamentary state, consisting of a senate of 400 elected by the people, besides the court of Areopagus. The poorest of the people had a right of speaking and voting in the assembly of the people, or, if you please, house of commons. The people indeed possessed, by this means, a degree of power above the reach of such as the vulgar were in those antient unimproved ages, before the art of printing had made knowledge universal as in our times. The errors in the Athenian state were in the first concoction. Had Salon been concerned in the original framing of it, that state would have been longer-lived. He confessed, that all he could do was to give the Athenians the best laws their degeneracy could bear.
Thebes, in Barotia, antiently a monarchy, was afterwards changed to a republic, and was a free or parliamentary government in the times of Pelopidas and Epaminondas, who raised it to great eminence among the states of those times, and at whose demise it funk again into its former obscurity. 
  Carthage was undoubtedly a free, or parliamentary state, without a king; though I do not know, that we have a particular account of its constitution from any antient author, Greek, or Latin; for of the country itself we have not so much as the name of a writer. We read of their having a senate, and of a fatal division among the people by the Hannonian faction, which ruined Hannibal's schemes, and prevented his making a total conquest of Rome after the battle of Cannæ.
The Roman government down to Julius Cæsar was parliamentary. Their senate may be compared to our house of peers, as the senators sat for life, and in their own right. And though the Romans had nothing of representation comparable to our house of commons, supposing our house of commons incorrupt and independent; yet representation, or giving the people their weight in government, was what they intended by their tribunes of the people, and by dividing the people into curia, comitia, tribes, &c. The Roman republic was but half-formed, arid the formed part was the least valuable. We read often of the tribunes sending the consuls to prison; and, we find the senate depriving the tribunes of their office. This shews the Roman republic to have been miserably ill-balanced, when the senate was sometimes above the tribunes, and the tribunes sometimes above the consuls. Romulus had originally divided the people into three tribes, and each of these into ten curia. He chose one senator himself, and ordered each of the tribes, and curiæ to chuse three, which amounted to 100 in all. None but patricians could be senators. Thus 99 of the 100 senators owed their seats to patricians, and all chosen by the people. When Tarquinius Priscust to ingratiate himself with the people at his accession, chose 100 senators out of their body, he enobled them first. The number of the senators probably continued to be about 300 till the time of Sylla, 530 years from Tarquinius Prisms. Sylla probably increased the number (by bringing in men for his purpose, to above 400. But these additional senators were still chosen by the people. Casar, to strenthen his party, increased the senate to 900, introducing all sorts of men, as new-made citizens, half barbarous Gauls, soldiers, and sons of freed-men. It would be a ridiculous to think of the people's having any hand in this tranfaction. For in Cæsar's time the army ruled all. And lastly the triumvirs increased the senate to above 1000. In the imperial times it is of no consequence what the number of the senate was; because all power was then engrossed by the emperors, and the senate was an empty name; that mighty senate, of which Cineas Pyrrhus's embassador, said, it seemed to him an assembly of kings; that senate, which was for ages the scourge of tyrants, was then become a mere ergastulum of slaves, the drudges, the flatterers, and supporters of tyrants.
  After Coriolianus's time, A U C 263, the plebeians became eligible, without being ennobled, into the senate. And those magistrates, who were called curule, had the privilege, during a certain time, of giving their votes in the senate, though they were not senators. The Roman senators voted either by a general Aye or No, sitting in their places, or by separately declaring each his sententia, as the censors called their names; or by dividing, those for the question going to one side of the house, and those against it to the other, which they called, ire fedibus in sententiam tuam, &c. and those senators, who only divided, without giving their reasons, were called senators s pedariI
The Roman republic was indeed never finished. For the caprice of the multitude was left to operate at random. So that every popular demagogue had it in his power to spirit up the multitude to whatever pitch of madness might suit his ambitious, or interested views. Nor was the general sense of the Roman people known by the fluctuating violence of the mob of the capital, who were often deceived, and often influenced, by largesses of corn, or by shews of gladiators; but who had more weight in the government, than the consuls, senate, and all the citizens of Italy and the other Roman dominions. The error consisted in the want of a regular subdivision, and representation of the people. The body of the people of property ought to have in their own hands the government of themselves. But the multitude in one great and debauched city ought not to be considered as the body of the people. The tribunitial power was too great. The appeals to the people at large, and their voting at large, was what first opened a door for the contests of Sylla and Marini, and of Cæsar and Pompey, which overset liberty.
The great error in the Roman republic was, that the people, or plebeians were not represented, but voted in a collective body; which occasioned continual tumult and confusion. They assembled in innumerable multitudes, and forced their tribunes upon whatever their licentious fancy dictated. They had no reading; consequently were very ignorant; and often chose the worst measure, when the senators, if left to themselves, would have chosen much better for them.
The Gauls to Pharamond's time, who died A D 428, managed all affairs in the assembly of the people, where they set up and dethroned their kings at their pleasure.
  The power of the French kings was antiently restrained within very narrow limits. Liberty was the same in France, as in all the Gothic states. The power was in the assembly of the states. The frequent calling of general assemblies was thought inconvenient. Therefore they had standing committees, which gave rise to the parliaments of France. The parliament of Paris first attended the king, then was fixed to Paris, for convenience. They formerly judged the Peers and great men of the kingdom, over whom the king had no power, because they were to be tried by their peers. All the great officers of state took their oaths in parliament; not bound personally to the king, but in his political capacity. Laws had no force, unless they registered them. The efficiency of all those checks is, now lost. No assembly of the states now heard of. Parliaments are only the shadow of what they were. Their tyrant has the liberties of the subject entirely at his mercy; imprisons whom he pleases; sets up what judges he pleases, to try whom he pleases, and convict them of what crime he pleases. The great officers take the oaths to him, and are responsible to him, and not at all, as formerly, to the people. This is the work of Richeliu. Advices from France, Jan. 1773, signify, that the princes of the blood have yielded to the court, and that the parliaments of France will be abolished to the very name: the thing has long been lost. This abolition has accordingly taken place since.
The three estates of France, in their times of freedom, were, 1. The clergy (they will always be uppermost.) 2. The nobility. 3, The deputies of the provinces.
According to the original system of the Franks, every free subject was intituled to some (hare in government, either in person, or by representation3.
Frequent conventions of the states of Denmark, when that country was free, were a fundamental article of the Danish constitution. They consulted concerning matters of government, laws, peace and war, taxes, and promotions to offices.
The Swedish government has always been upon a parliamentary, or free plan. In that country, till the revolution in 1772, four estates made the laws, viz 1000 noblesse, 100 ecclesiastics (just 100 too many) 100 citizens, and about 250 peasants. They had no nobility before A D 1560. Voltaire observes, that Charles XI was the first absolute prince in Sweden and Charles XII, his grandson, the last.
The Spanish cortes were much the same as our parliaments, composed of prelates, masters of the military orders, nobles, and representatives sent from the cities, and towns (no mention of counties). No act could pass unless they were unanimous as our juries. And the acts must be confirmed by the king. They were assembled by summons from the king and privy council, and dissolved by order of the president of the council. But a committee of eight sat still. They have been rarely called since 1647. Their last sitting was in 1713. They were laid aside by Charles V because they would grant no money, and because he found he could raise money without them. The Visigoths governed in Spain about 350 years, terminating about A D 700. During that period, Spain was very respectable. Her government was free; her church more pure than others, from popish superstition, rejecting the pope's supremacy. Her monarchs, elective and limited, as in almost all the Gothic states, commanded the army, called general councils, proposed the subjects to be considered, gave their sanction to laws, gave out edicts merely executive, coined money, gave employments, conferred honours; but all under correction of the general council, who could set aside any of the king's acts. All the northern nations had such a mixed form of government, in which no money could be raised, nor laws made, or repealed, but with their consent. Spain is now under absolute government, occasioned by the timidity of the Castilians, who finally gave up the cause of liberty on a defeat in war, between them and Charles V which lasted only two years (the Dutch fought for liberty 70 years). Charles told the cortes, he wanted them to grant him supplies first, and then he would pass their bills. The wretched Castilians  gave up the point, and voted their tyrant, whom they ought to have destroyed, almost half a million sterling. Such is the inertia of mankind.
The cortes of Portugal have long since fold to the crown their part 'in the legislature. Their government, which was once free and parliamentary, is now unmixed despotism, and their cortes like the parliaments of France. The ceremony of giving Don Alonzo I of Portugal the kingdom, by the public approbation of the people, A D 1140, exhibited a glorious spirit in both king and people.
The Helvetic confederacy is the most considerable republican or parliamentary government, after the Venetians. The Swift cantons are not, properly speaking, a republic, but an union of several republics. But they have a common assembly, in which all matters interesting to the whole community are debated; whatever is there determined by the majority, binds the whole; they all agree in making peace, and declaring war; and the laws and customs, which prevail throughout the Swift cantons, are (excepting the difference in religion between the protestant and popish provinces) nearly the same6. There are, indeed, some differences both in constitution and administration. But so are there differences between the three kingdoms, and the numerous colonies, which compose the British dominion; nay there are differences between the customs in the several counties of England. All this shews, contrary to a common prejudice, that the largest dominions, as well as the smallest, may be administered in the republican form with as much success as in the monarchical. The Roman republic took in a much greater extent of dominion than many modern kingdoms put together; and was, with all its imperfections, as well administered, to say the least, as most monarchies have been. But this is matter of speculation merely.
The diet of Poland is constitutionally composed of king, senate, bishops, and deputies of the landholders of every palatinate. Every owner of three acres of land has a vote for a member. And the majority carries every point. But in the general diet, unanimity is necessary. Every palatinate (without regard to the towns in it) sends three members. The indigent gentry are always directed by some person of superior fortune, influence, or ability. The diet of Poland consists of an upper and lower house. The upper house contains the senate, the superior clergy, and the great officers; the lower the representatives of the palatinates. An edict by king Jagellon, who reigned in the 16th century, found contrary to his coronation oath, was hewn in pieces before his face by the Polish sabres. The Polish nobility will not give up the privilege of electing their kings, though they always elect the hereditary successors. By this they impress their Kings with the idea of obligation to their subjects; and at the same time, the heir to the crown is properly educated. 
When liberty began to dawn (says Voltaire) about A D 1300, the states general of France, the parliament of England, the states of Arragon and Hungary, and the diets of the German empire were all nearly on the same foot, as to the privileges and consequence of the third estate. [We have seen some difference arise since the above period. Let Britain take care, lest (he come into the condition, into which those states are fallen.]
France (says the same author) b was once governed as England is now. The kings assembled the states. In the year 1355, they made their king John sign a charter much like the Magna Charta of England. 
There was scarce an absolute prince in Europe, about the 13th century. But the nobles were tyrants, and the feudal tenures universal. In short, to use the words of the great Alg. Sidney, in Germany, France, Spain, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, Scotland, England, and generally all the nations, that have lived under the gothic polity, this supreme power has been in their general assemblies under the name of diets, cortes, senates, parliaments, &c.
Of Parliaments
Parliaments in England have been of very fluctuating importance in different ages. It was long before they got to what might be called a bearing. And even now, there is in them infinitely more wrong than right, as will too manifestly appear by what follows.
Parliaments are irregular and deficient, 1, by establishment; and 2, by abuse. When I distinguish between the irregularities and deficiencies in our parliaments by establishment, and by abuse, I mean by the former such irregularities and deficiencies as are known and avowed, as their too great length, their being an inadequate representation, &c. By the latter, I mean those which have insensibly crept in, and prevail through connivance, as corruption at elections, and in the house, &c.
  It is justly remarked by Mr. Hume, That whatever, in government, is publicly allowed at any particular period, may be said to be constitutional at that period, especially (it may be added) if it has been regularly and openly introduced and established by approbation of the majority of those, who have the power of establishing it.
The lengthening of parliaments from annual to triennial, and from triennial to septennial, is undoubtedly an abuse (of which more hereafter) but being avowedly effected at first, and allowed since, this abuse becomes constitutional.
  But the buying of boroughs, and of votes in the house of commons, was never fairly established, nor openly avowed as a regular proceeding, and is therefore a mere abuse, and not a constitutional error.
  Almost all political establishments have been the creatures of chance rather than of wisdom. There are few instances of a people forming for themselves a constitution from the foundation. Therefore it is impossible to say what would be the effect of a perfect commonwealth; there being no example of such a phenomenon. The common course of those matters has been, that either a people have emigrated from an old established government, and have wrought into their new system of politics the errors and deficiencies, which had crept into the old; or a few wise and good men have undertaken to repair and patch up a crazy constitution; and then, like Solon, they found themselves obliged to be content with as good a constitution as the people would bear, instead of such an one as a wise legislator could frame. And in establishing this constitution, they have been obliged to yield to the violence of party, and the blindness of prejudice, and to suffer various particulars to be established contrary to their own better judgment. So that the machine of government being pushed one way by one party, and the contrary by another, is at last pushed into a bog, or set on the edge of a precipice, and left out of the perpendicular, like the hanging tower of Pisa, to be propped and shored up by posterity. This is in part the case of our own constitution, especially with respect to the commons house of parliament. If there be in a ship at sea ten leaks, to stop nine of them will not put the crew in a state of safety; though they must perhaps be stopped one after another, they must all be stopped, else the consequence is obvious; There are several frightful leaks in the great vessel of the British state, which, if they be not all stopped, must sink it.
The grievances requiring redress, which respect parliament, are chiefly these: 1 By establishment they are in no respect a representation of the property of the people. 2 Their period is, likewise by establishment, of an enormous length. 3 They are, by abuse, corrupt, or fallen under an undue influence both as to the election of members, and their voting in the house.
WHEN our ancestors first proposed government by representation, it is certain, they intended adequate representation; for no ether deserves the name, or answers the end.
  In a free state (says judge Blackstone) every man, who is supposed a free agent (that is, not through poverty, absolutely dependent on the will of another) ought to be, in some measure, his own governor, and therefore a branch, at least, of the legislative power ought to reside in the whole body of the people.
  It is evident that inadequate representation in parliament is utterly inconsistent with the idea of free government. For a people governed contrary to their inclination, or by persons, to whom they have given no commission for that purpose, are, in the properest sense of the phrase, an enslaved people, if ever there was an enslaved people.
  At Sparta, the sense of the people was collected from a suffrage of 10,000. At Rome, this was neglected; which was one great cause of its ruin.
  To compare great things with small, could the East India company be said to be established on a proper foot, if 100 proprietors, whose stock amounted in all to 5,000 L had the power of chusing the court of directors against the votes of 5000 proprietors, whose stock was worth 5,000,000 L and if the court of directors, when chosen, possessed absolute power without appeal, and thought themselves responsible to no set of men upon earth? Or if a friendly society consisting of 100 members found that the whole power of the society was engrossed by 3 members; and that the others could obtain nothing they wanted, or in the manner they wished to have it; could this society be, with any shadow of propriety, called free? That parliamentary representation on its present foot, is as inconsistent with liberty, will appear but too clearly in the sequel.
That a part of the people, a small part of the poor pie, and the most needy and dependent part of the people, should engross the power of electing legislators, and deprive the majority, and the independent part of the people of their right, which is, to chuse legislators for themselves and the minority and dependent part of the people, is the grossest injustice that can be imagined.
Every government, to have a reasonable expectation of permanency, ought to be founded in truth, justice, and the reason of things. Our admirable constitution, the envy of Europe, is founded in injustice. Eight hundred individuals rule all, themselves accountable to none. Of these about 300 are born rulers, whether qualified or not. Of the others, a great many are said to be elected by a handful of beggars instead of the number and property, who have the right to be the electors. And of these pretended electors, the greatest part are obliged to chuse the person nominated by some lord, or by the minister. Instead of the power's returning annually into the hands of the people, or, to speak properly of the boroughs, the lengthening of parliament to septennial, has deprived them of six parts in seven of their power; and if the power returned annually, as it ought, all the people would still have reason to complain, but the handful who vote the members into the house.
  In consequence of the inadequate state of representation, the sense of the people may be grossly misapprehended, or misrepresented, and it may turn out to be of very little consequence, that members were willing to obey the instructions of their constituents; because that would not be obeying the general sense of the people. For the people are not their constituents. The people of England are the innumerable multitude which fills, like one continued city, a great part of Middlesex, Kent and Surry the countless inhabitants of the vast ridings of Yorkshire, the multitudes, who swarm in the cities and great towns of Bristol, Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham, Ely, and others; some of which places have no representatives at all, and the rest are unequally represented. These places comprehend the greatest part of the people. Whereas the instructions would be sent from the hungry boroughs of Cornwal, Devonshire, &c. In short, the sense of the constituent would be, at best, only the sense of a few thousands; whereas it ought to be that of several hundreds of thousands, as will be very clearly made out by and by.
Parliament under Henry VIII confirmed the demolition of the papal power over England, and the dissolution of the religious houses; under Edward VI demolished popery; under Mary, set it up again; under Elizabeth, overthrew it a second time. So we have seen parliament stamp the Americans, then unstamp them, and then tax them in a new manner. Parliament has not, in these sudden doings and undoings, followed the sense of the people. The unsteady people are not so unsteady as this comes to. In former times, parliament was too much overawed by the authority of kings: in latter times, too much swayed by ministerial influence; and all this in consequence of its being in no respect a just and accountable representative of the people.
The nation in general disapproved of the proceedings of the tory commons, A D 1701, and the justices of peace, grand jury, freeholders, &c. of Kent presented a petition, cementing the divisions in the kingdom, and the reflexions cast upon the king (by the commons) recommending union, attention to the sense of the people, supplies, &c. The house votes it scandalous, insolent, seditious, tending to destroy the constitution of parliament, and to subvert the established government of these realms. They ordered the gentlemen, who presented it, to be taken into custody. One escaped. It was apprehended that force would be used to rescue the others. The house orders them to the gatehouse, and addresses the king to issue his proclamation for apprehending Colepepper again, and for putting out of the commission of the peace and lieutenancy such of the petitioners as were in them. The imprisoning of the Kentish petitioners was afterwards condemned in parliament. Yet the commons condemned the petition itself, and resolved, that to assert, that the house of commons is not the only representative of the commons of England, or that the commons have no power of commitment, but over their own members, or to reflect on the proceedings of the house, or of any member in the house, are high violations of the privileges of the house of commons. All this is the heigth of despotism, and is indeed inconsistent with itself.
  In the case of Ashby and White, the resolutions of the commons were directly contrary to the sense of the people. The people's universal opinion was, that the commons took too much upon them; and that any person may, and ought to appeal to the courts of justice and the law of the land, when he thinks himself deprived of his right as an elector; the resolutions of a house of commons being unsteady and vague, while the law of the land is notorious and permanent. Of which more hereafter.
We have, in our own times, seen a most remarkable instance of disagreement between the sense of the people, and that of parliament. We have seen parliament repeatedly expel Mr. Wilkes. And we have seen the people so highly offended at this proceeding, that 60,000 of them have petitioned the king to dissolve this parliament. Inconsequence of which numerous petitions, it was to be expected, that some notice would be taken in the king's, that is the minister's speech, next ensuing. Instead of which (so low, is the people's importance sunk, and so little regard shewn to their opinion) the laughter of all Europe was excited by a few frivolous paragraphs about a pretended sickness among the horned cattle, of which no body had heard any thing before as then existing in England, nor has any one since. It was moved in the house of commons, that, in their address, in answer to the above profound speech, the house should declare their intention of enquiring into the causes of the present discontents. Several of the courtly members gravely denied that there was any discontent in the kingdom, though they knew that 60,000 had subscribed petitions for a dissolution of parliament. They might have argued more plausibly, that there was no parliament then exiting. For it will appear presently, that a tenth part of the above number sends in the majority of the house. And if the voluntary petition of 60,000 deserves no regard, surely the bought votes of 5000 ought to go for nothing. Others of the opposers of the motion said, The affair did not come regularly before them; as if they had declared, that the house of commons, the grand inquest of the nation, the representatives of the people of England, are not obliged to enquire into a matter of such consequence in the opinion of the people, that 60,000 of them had thought it necessary to complain to the sovereign; or as if they so wholly disregarded the opinion of ten times the number of the electors of the majority of their house, concerning their own conduct, that they did not think it worth while to enquire what had so grievously offended so great a number of their constituents, as to provoke them to the unusual measure of petitioning the king for their dissolution. Others of the courtly gentlemen, in imitation of Walpole, said, the petitioners were base-born. But surely they could not be more base-born, than the beggars, who send in the majority of the house of Commons.
The ministerial party, however, carried it against the motion.
FIVE millions, according to the estimate of my incomparable friend Dr. Price, and our best modern calculators, is nearest to the true number of the people of England. The males between 16 and 56 in 5 millions are 1,250,000, or a fourth part of the whole. As youth at 16 are of an age too immature to be capable of voting, so are many on the contrary capable of voting beyond the age of 56; and one may be supposed to make up for the other. It is commonly insisted on, that persons in servitude to others, and those who receive alms, ought not to be admitted to vote for members of parliament, because it is supposed, that their votes will be influenced by those, on whom they depend.
But the objection from influence would fall to the ground, if the state were on a right foot, and parliment free from court-influence. Supposing half the constitution in disorder, it is not easy to determine what would be best for the other half. My purpose is, to point out all the defects. And if the people will correct all I shall point out, I will then answer, that all shall go well; but not if they amend by halves. -- To return.
Every man has what may be called property, and unalienable property. Every man has a life, a personal liberty, a character, a right to his earnings, a right to a religious profession and worship according to his conscience, &c. and many men, who are in a state of dependence upon others, and who receive charity, have wives and children, in whom they have a right. Thus the poor are in danger of being injured by the government in a variety of ways. But, according to the commonly received doctrine, that servants, and those who receive alms, have no right "to vote for members of parliament, an immense multitude of the people are utterly deprived of all power in determining who shall be the protectors of their lives, their personal liberty, their little property (which though singly considered is of small value, yet is upon the whole a very great object) and the chastity of their wives and daughters, &c. What is particularly hard upon the poor in this case is, that though they have no share in determining who shall be the lawgivers of their country, they have a very heavy share in raising the taxes which support government. The taxes on malt, beer, leather, soap, candles, and other articles, which are paid chiefly by the poor, who are allowed no votes for members of parliament, amount to as much as a heavy land-tax. The landed interest would complain grievously, if they had no power of electing representatives. And it is an established maxim in free  states, that whoever contributes to the expences of government ought to be satisfied concerning the application of the money contributed by them; consequently ought to have a share in electing those, who have the power of applying their money. Nor has the receiving of alms been always held a sufficient reason for refusing the privilege of voting. Query, Whether there be not other instances of persons receiving alms, having a right to vote for members.
But, giving up the point, concerning the right of the poor to vote for members of parliament, the present state of parliamentary representation will still appear to be inadequate beyond all proportion. Of the 1,250,000, the whole number of males in England, we may well suppose that at least one third, or about 416,000 are housekeepers, and independent on alms Divide this number by 513, the number of members for England, the quotient is 799 and a fraction, the round number is 800, which shews, that no member of parliament ought to carry his election against a competitor by fewer than 401 votes, that being a majority of 800, who have the right of voting, exclusive tf the poor and dependent. If we allow them the privilege of chusing representatives, which I see no argument against, the number wrll be much greater, viz about 1200, a majority of which is 601.
Mr. Postlethwayte reckons 639,000 taxable persons in England, excluding Wales.  And every person, who pays tax, ought to have a vote. Calculators did formerly reckon above 6,000,000 of souls in England and Wales. And Dr. Price shews, that there is great reason to apprehend (with much concern I write it) that `we have lost a fourth part of our people.' Supposing Postletlhwayte's number of taxable persons in England and Wales together to be 630,000; dividing this number by 513 shews, that no member ought to be voted into the house by fewer than the majority of 1200; for 1200 have a right, and 6oi ought to be the smallest number of votes actually given to him who gains his election against a competitor. Or if we calculate by counties, the present slate of representation will appear enormously absurd. I he most adequate plan for forming an assembly of representatives, would be, for every county, including the cities, 'boroughs, cinque ports, or universities it happens to contain, to send in a proportion of the 513 answering to its contribution to the public expence. Were that the plan, we should, in the same manner, see no member sent into the house by fewer than several hundreds of voters. Of which hereafter.
LET the reader judge for himself of the monstrous irregularity of .parliamentary representation, from the following view of it by the learned and indesatigably laborious Brown Willis. 
  In the following extract, I have stated the majority as the only electors in each place; which they really are, the votes of the minority being inefficient. I have given to Walling ford, for instance, 76, the majority of 150 electors, which latter is the whole number of voters in that borough; so that no member for Walling ford can be elected by more than 76 efficient votes; and he, who has 76 votes, is as effectually elected as if he had the whole 150. And I have computed the number of votes, which elect the majority of the house, as the majority is the same, to all intents and purposes of legislation, with the whole 558, nem con. 
The right of election at Grampound is in the corporation of nine men, and burgesses made by them, which burgesses, therefore, are not to be accounted as free electors, being made for the purpose of the election. This is the case in other places, which I have not noted.
From this extract we see, that 254 members are actually elected by 5723 votes; now the most numerous meeting of the commons ever known, was on occasion of the debate about Walpole, A D 1741. There were then 502 in the house. Therefore 254 comes very near a majority of the house, or the whole acting and efficient number. And the greatest part of these illustrious, 5723, who have the power of constituting lawgivers over the property of the nation, are themselves persons of no property.
  In North Britain the number of souls is about 1,5000,000. The males between 16 and 56 are 300,000. Allowing one third part to be their own masters, and to be above receiving charity, no Scotch member ought to be elected by fewer than a majority of 2000 votes. But there are many instances of members elected in North Britain by almost as small a number as in England. The truth of the matter is, that in North Britain, though the country be nothing as to riches, compared with England, yet there are fewer beggars. Almost all are housekeepers, though a great number of those houses are wretched hovels. So that almost all adult males ought to be voters in North Britain. 
Lord Talbot a, in his speech in the house of peers, A D 1739, supposes, that 50,000 elect the majority of the house. And he justly exclaims against that number, as utterly disproportionate, which it undoubtedly is, if the due number be 416,000. or 639,000. What would his lordship have said, had he known that little more than a tenth part of his 50,000 send In the majority of our law-makers?
Taking the whole representative for South and North Britain, the members for counties are only 131 of the 558, of which 131,42 are for Scotland and Wales. The members, therefore, for the boroughs and cinque-ports, which ought not to be one in ten, compared with those for the counties, are 382, above four times as many. So that for one may be supposed to come fairly into the house, sour (if we except a few for the great cities) are sent by the poorest of the people, directed by court-influence.
We have seen above that, dividing the right of voting as it ought to be, no member should be elected by fewer than the majority of 800 votes. But we find, that not one member of all these 254 is elected by a number so high as 300; and a multitude by a number below 20.
  If we take the places, where a majority of the electors comes below 20, it is shameful what a proportion of the 513 is sent into the house by a handful, and that handful mostly people in low circumstances, and therefore obnoxious to bribery, or under the power of their superiors.
Here we see 56 members (about a ninth part of the whole for England) are sent into the house of commons by 364 votes, which number ought not to send in one member. For no member ought to be elected by fewer than the majority of 800, upon the most moderate calculation, according to Dr. Price, in order to give 410,000 voters their due and equally distributed share of legislative power, without which equal distribution the majority of the men of property are enslaved to the handful of beggars, who, by electing the majority of the house of commons, have so great an overbalance of power over them, as to be able to carry every point in direct opposition to their opinion, and to their interest.
Here we see two persons, the lord of the pitiful town of Newton, in the isle of Wight, and him of Old Sarum, Wiltshire, where there is not a house, send in as many members as the inestimable wealth of the city of London, in which the livery, who are the legal electors, are the persons, who ought to have votes are probably 20,000, and upwards. Here to individuals have equal weight in the state with 30,000!
The British government, therefore, taking it according to its avowed state, is neither absolute monarchy nor limited monarchy, nor aristocracy, nor democracy, nor a mixture of monarchy, aristocracy and democracy; but may be called a ptochocracy (the reader will pardon a new word) or government of beggars. For a few beggarly boroughs do avowedly elect the most important part of the government, the part which commands the purse. It is true this is only the ostensible state of things. The British government is really a juntocracy (I doubt the reader will now think I presume upon his good nature) or government by a minister and his crew. For the court directs the beggars whom to chuse.
  Is this the universally admired and universally envied British constitution?
How much more proper would a petition have been, from the friends of liberty to the king, to set himself at the head of a plan for restoring independency to parliament, than petitioning him to dissolve that which was then sitting. What point could have been gained by that measure? It is a handful of beggars, bribed, or awed, by the court, or the grandees, that sends the majority of the members into the house. Would not they have sent back the same men? Did they dare to send any others? If it be said, that the dissolution of the parliament then sitting would have redressed all grievances, it must follow, that a new parliament would; but how many new parliaments have we seen since the revolution? Yet we have now standing armies, septennial parliaments, rotten boroughs, placemen in the house, excises, &c.
Though I have not the least idea of wishing so great a change in the constitution, as would exclude king and lords from parliament; yet I may, I think, be allowed just to mention, that the great power by our constitution rested in a small number of individuals, which will always make an inequality, and an unbalancing, ought to make us the more desirous of reducing, if possible, one of our three estates at least, to somewhat a little nearer to adequate, than it is at present. But of this more hereafter.
  Representation in the house of commons is inadequate in other respects besides those already mentioned.
  In antient times, when parliaments were first established, there was no property but that of land. Therefore all powers, and all honours, were heaped on the landed men. The consequence was, that the landed interest was too well represented, to the detriment (in our times) of the mercantile and monied. This is an occasion of various evils. For many of our country-gentlemen are but bad judges of the importance of the mercantile interest, and do not wisely consult it in their bills and acts. Of this kind are the game-act, the dog-act, and taxes on every necessary of life, which give oar rivals in trade a great advantage over us. And ministers, to curry favour with the house of commons, are tempted to burden commerce with taxes for the sake of easing the landed interest. See the art of Walpole to this purpose, by proposing to ease the land of one milling in the pound, and laying a duty on salt for three years, to make up the deficiency. It was objected to this proposal, That the salt-duty was always reckoned a grievous burden upon the manufacturing poor, and was therefore taken off; and that it was a strange paradox, that the landed gentlemen were poorer than the poor, and therefore in more need of relief from a heavy tax.
  It is the overbalance of the power in the hands of the landed men, that has produced the bounty on exportation of corn (of which more fully hereafter) which increases the manufacturer's expence of living, and discourages the exportation of our manufactures. This is, in the end, hurtful to the landed interest. But short-sighted and selfish men do not see it in that light; nor will seem to understand, that the land-tax, while nominally three shillings in the pound, is not really nine-pence. The time was, when land in England might have been purchased for a 50th part of its present value. What has given it the 49 parts additional worth? Can any one imagine, the difference is owing to any thing, but our trade and manufactures?
  It was owing to a want of merchants in the house, that the bill for restraining paper-credit in America was brought in. And it was no small disgrace to the house, that there were petitions against it presented from most of the agents for the colonies, as an imprudent and hurtful scheme. Postlethwayte has made many remarks on the advantage of merchants in the house of commons, to whom I must refer the reader.
  Is not an aristocracy a government in the hands of a few, or of one class, or one interest, excluding the body of the people of property from their due weight in government? Is not our house of peers wholly, and our house of commons chiefly filled with men, whose property is land? Is not therefore the government of this mercantile and manufacturing country in the hands of the landed interest to the exclusion of the mercantile and manufactural? Does not then the government of this country tend too much to aristocracy?
The eldest sons of Scotch peers are declared incapable of sitting in the house of commons. But the sons of English peers may sit, so that ten individuals out of one family may be legislators. Is not this too aristocratical?
  It is said, property in land is more capable of being proved, than in merchandize, manufactures, or stocks. But this is frivolous; for any man, though possessed of an ostensible land-estate, may be in debt to more than the value of his estate; and where is then his qualification?
The interest of merchants is so much the interest of the nation, that there can hardly be too many merchants in parliament. The London members almost always vote on the side of liberty. It is objected, that each merchant will probably vote in parliament for what is most for the advantage of his own particular branch. True. . Therefore let a considerable number of merchants always have feats in the house, and then all different interests will be consulted. It has likewise been argued, that merchants are bad, members, because they are liable to be influenced in favour of the court by government contracts. But here again comes in my observation concerning partial reformations. Correct all the other abuses, and court-influence will become impossible. Then will appear the advantage of merchants in the house of Commons. Of all which more hereafter.
  As to the monied interest, if the public debts are not to be paid, or some substantial security found for them, it would be very proper, that the monied interest (as such) should have representation in parliament. Else what security have we, that a profligate court will not shut up the exchequer, as Charles II did, and obtain, by corrupt means, the sanction of parliament for the measure? It is indeed alledged, that the mercantile, manufactural, and monied interests are represented by the members of the cities, and boroughs. But this is nothing to the purpose. Because the qualification required is always to be in land.
Representation in the commons house of parliament came to be thus out of all proportion inadequate, in much the same manner as cities come to be built in defience of all plan or regularity by every land-proprietor's humouring his own caprice in building upon his own ground. Our kings and our queens gave and took away the privilege of sending members, as pleased their fancy without all regard to justice, or proportion.
Mr. Carte alledges, that the lawyers, in the puritan times, in order to strengthen their own party,, searched old records, and found, that many towns of the king's demesne had been summoned once or twice by Edward I to send representatives; and on this founded a pretence, that these were in all times parliament-towns. 
There was in the time of Henry V a debate about the surrender of corporations. Bæda  and Newbury surrendered their corporations to the king. It was questioned, Whether a corporation can surrender its charter, which is robbing posterity. And the commons called upon those towns to fend members, notwithstanding the surrender. The house however excused their sending members on their pleading inability, and 'they sent none since. An act passed 1690, to declare the right and-freedom of election for the cinque-ports. Before this bill the wardens of the cinque-ports claimed a right of nominating to each cinque-port one person to serve as baron or member of parliament.
Under James II the power of electing members of parliament was in many places transferred from the inhabitants in general to the magistrates; because they were likely to be more within the reach of bribery. The borough of Stockbtidge, A D 1689, for bribery, narrowly escaped being disfranchised, and incapacitated for ever tor sending members, and instead of its 2 members, an addition was proposed to be made of 2 more knights of the shire for the county of Southampton.
MEMBERS of parliament have the properties, liberties and lives of the nation in their hands, and hold themselves accountable to no man, or set of men, for the laws they make. Ought the trustees of so great a charge to be men capable of giving or receiving base bribes? Members of parliament ought to be men of good natural parts, education, and character, found reasoners, graceful speakers, knowing in the three interests, viz the landed, the commercial, and the monied, in general history, law, and politics, and in the history, laws, and politics of Britain, learned in human nature, and masters of the spirit and disposition of the inhabitants of the three kingdoms, and of the colonies. Is it to be conceived, that the inhabitants of a set of miserable Cornish boroughs are judges of such high accomplishments as these? Were election of members of parliament upon its proper foot, every county, including its cities and towns, would elect a set of gentlemen to be its representatives. This would concentre the wisdom of the whole county, and not leave it, as at present, in the power of a dozen silly fellows to set up a lawmaker, capable or incapable, over their country.
Here I must hint to the reader,  that, though I have stated the accomplishments of a member pretty high, I am sensible, that lower, with integrity, will suffice, or at least would, if parliament were upon the proper foot as to independency. But the samentable part of the case is at present, that by far the greatest part of our electors are wholly incapable of distinguishing, and must be supposed often to chuse the worst qualified of the candidates, and reject the best.
We often see, before a general election, many flaming harangues addressed to the people, shewing them the importance of chusing proper persons for so momentous a trust. I have wondered in myself how any man of sense could waste his paper and ink so fruitlessly as in giving people advice, which no man, who knows human nature, can expect them to take. The plain English of those harangues is as follows. Illustrious beggars of the Cornish boroughs!
Your country expects of you at the approaching election, what every considerate person must conclude to be wholly out of your reach, viz. That you will wisely and honestly consider the importance of the trust reposed in you, of sending into the legislative assembly of the nation so great a proportion of the members. It is expected, that you are well qualified, without having ever had the means for being qualified to judge of the fitness of candidates; that you, who have neither knowledge of books, nor of the world, should judge unerringly of the capacities and dispositions of persons, who offer themselves as candidates for your favour. It is likewise expected, illustrious beggars, that you, whose circumstances are, in the most miserable degree, dependent, should be, in your principles and dispositions, independent patriots. As we require a qualification in members of parliament, of several hundreds a year, that they may be above temptation, (o we expect of you, who are in continual want, that you defy temptation. Do not, patriotic electors, regard the threats of your landlords, when they tell you, they will turn you out of your dwelling. Remember what you never learned in Horace.
It requires no fortitude above whatever gross unprincipled fellow is master of, to die in a ditch for your country, with her wives and children about you.
  'Legislation (says Blackstone3) is the greatest act of superiority, that can be exercised by one being over another.' How few then can be supposed qualified for such a momentous trust! But we put this trust in the hands of any man, however worthless, or incapable, who is able and willing to lay out a few thousands in the purchase of a borough.
None were to be eligible to parliament in Cromwel's time, but persons of known integrity, fearing God and of good conversation; no common scoffer or reviler of Religion; none who denies the scripture to be the word of God; no common profaner of the Lord's day; no professed swearer or curser; no drunkard, haunter of taverns, ale-houses, or brothels, nor that shall hereafter drink healths, or be guilty of adultery, fornication, extortion, bribery, perjury, forgery, &c. Here was such an exclusion-bill, as, if it had been put in force in our times, would have left St. Stephen's Chapel miserably depopulated. But how should the house be filled with proper members by improper electors? The lords rejected, A D 1702, after a second reading, a bill to provide, that no person be chosen a member of the commons, who has not a sufficient real estate. A great many lords protested against the rejection of so good a bill; because the design of it was, to prevent foreigners, and men of no property, from having the power of taxing the property of Englishmen. But men of no property have now the power of taxing the property of Englishmen. For the members for the boroughs are four times as numerous as those for the counties.
There was much debating in the house of commons, A D 1770, upon a bill for settling what offences should be punished by incapacitation to sit in the house. If what judge Blackstone affirms, as above, be unquestionably true, it is a matter of supreme consequence, that only men of unquestionable characters be legislators. For my part, I should think a law for incapacitating every man of an ambiguous character, highly proper and necessary. We know how exact in that respect the antient heathens were. And it were a shame, that the professors of the purest of all religions should be more lax in principle then they. But how is it to be expected, that any particular regarding elections should be properly managed by such weak and influenced men as those, who send in the majority of the house?
  I believe Henry VIII and his termagant daughter did not ask the consent of the house of commons, when they gave to so many places the power of sending members to parliament. And if not, according to this author, those places have no legal right to lend members. The miserable village of Bossiney was made a free borough neither by king nor queen, but by Richard earl of Cornival, brother to Henry III it sent members for the first time under Edward VI Surely we have no occasion to be encumbered by this paltry place, and its venal members. If a king's brother, if even a sheriff of the county, can give privilege of sending members, surely a king can take away that mock privilege. Or if kings, and brothers of kings can give privilege to paltry boroughs in one age, then kings and their brothers can, in another more enlightened age, give privilege to respectable counties and great cities, to send up that number of representatives, which is found to be adequate to their respective contributions to the public expence. Our good king George III (whom God preferve !) has as good a right, at least in foro conscientiœ, to give London 100 additional members, to give Bristol 20 additional, 20 to the county of York, &c as our Maries, our Elizabeths, and our Henries, had to give a set of rotten boroughs the privilege of sending three times their adequate number. If a king has power in the 15th or 16th century, to do wrong, surely a king has power in the 18th to redress that wrong,
  Suppose, for the experiment's sake, the cities of London and Westminster, and county of Middlesex, should join in a decent petition to the legislature, requesting, that the excessive number of members, which represents the county of Cornwal, may be transferred to the service of the inestimable opulent metropolitan cities and county, and their miserably inadequate representation to the inconsiderable county of Cornwall or, in other words, that London and Westminster, and Middlesex may, for the future, be represented by 41 members (not half the adequate number) and Cornwal by 10. Suppose Cornwal to petition, that nothing may be changed. Here would be two counter petitions before the legislature one, of the most respectable property, that sends representatives to parliament, requesting what they have an undoubted title to; the other of a comparatively inconsiderable property, insisting to keep what undoubtedly they have no right to, have obtained in a surreptitious manner, and have kept a great deal too long. Would the legislature listen to the latter, and reject the former?
Were the privilege of election taken from the boroughs, there would be less occasion for a place-bill. For large bodies of the independent people would not elect, or re-elect place-men. No invention could have been thought of more favourable to court-influence in parliament, than giving so great importance to the beggarly boroughs. They are the creatures of the court. That is, they receive their privilege from kings; and the burgage tenures in them generally belong to men of fortune, who have power to oblige the inhabitants of these burgage-houses to elect whom they please. And the court having great funds at its disposal, ambitious and avaritious men are thereby drawn to the court-side in promoting the election of courtly men. But above all, the easiness of bribing a small handful of voters, who have the privilege of sending two members, is ruinous to the independency of the house of commons.
  In the year 1742, there came before the lords a bill for quieting corporations, occasioned by an appeal to them from the violence used by Walpole, in order to compel the election of some of his creatures for Weymouth. That arch-corrupter had endeavoured to intimidate the corporation by threatening their charter. A minister cannot by any such means influence a county, or a great city. 

