Disquisitions 5
  The duke of Bedford, in the year 1735, presented a petition to the lords from the dukes of Hamilton, Queensberry and Montrose, and the earls of Dundonald, Marchmont and Stair, complaining, That, at the election of the sixteen Scotch peers, several undue methods and illegal practices were used, of which they could bring proofs, and praying that the house of lords would allow them to be laid before them a. The petitioners were persons of the highest rank and most respectable personal characters. The matter of their petition was of supreme consequence, affecting the very existence of the house of lords.
Some of the court-lords were against making any enquiry into the matter of it; fearing, that some things might come out, which would not be much for their honour. The earl of Chesterfield and lord Bathurst said, it was very extraordinary, that any hesitation should be made in the house of lords whether they should listen to a complaint of so high an enormity made by persons of such rank. When the matter came before the house, the dukes of Atbol and Buccleugh observed, that the terms of the petition were vague and indefinite. It was remarked, that two Scotch peers speaking against the petition was rather indelicate. It was likewise observed, that the house of peers is not, like the courts below, confined to forms; but may proceed to the general issue and merits of the cause in the most natural way. It was moved, That the petitioning lords should be desired to declare, whether they intended to controvert the late election. The petitioning lords declared, they did not intend to controvert the election or return of the sixteen peers from Scotland, but only to lay before the house certain proceedings at the election, which they thought dangerous to the constitution, and which might affect future elections. A multitude of difficulties were started about such an enquiry's drawing imputations on certain characters; but it was rightly observed, that the lords would do well to consider, whether throwing impediments in the way of a due enquiry into the matter of the petition, would not draw imputations upon the house of peers.
The petitioning lords made a renewed application to the house of peers, signifying, besides what they had said in their first representation, that they could not, in the matter of their petition, act both as prosecutors and witnesses; that though their informations were sufficiently certain as to the fact, that there had been undue proceedings at the election of Scotch peers, yet their informers might not have thought proper to give in names, and may avoid doing so, till brought before the house of peers. 
  All this however, went for nothing with many of their good lordships. It was not sufficiently particular to be taken notice of by the house. Direct bribery was not a sufficiently particular instance of illegal practices; nor were the different species of it, particularized by the petitioning lords, particular enough. The demurring lords were even so hard put to it, that they blamed the petitioning lords for not mentioning the name of the officer, who commanded the regiment, which was appointed to overawe the election. But nothing would have been more trifling than their naming him, because he was not guilty; but was obliged to obey his superior officer.
The ministerial lords made a handle of the circumstance, that the petitioning lords did not comply with their order, and send the names of the offenders. A gross proof of partiality against the matter of the petition! For the petitioning lords did not know all their names; and petitioned the house expressly for the purpose of finding out the guilty persons; which the petitioning lords themselves could not do. Besides that the naming, before examination, of the suspected persons was the sure way to defeat the examination by putting them upon absconding, or running away, and securing their betters from discovery. One would almost imagine, their tender-hearted lordships meant this in pure compassion to the poor innocents, who had unthinkingly stabbed the liberties of their country; At any rate, there was one obvious advantage, of which the lords disappointed the nation, viz. The legislatures finding means for preventing (if they wished to prevent) such corrupt practices for the future.  
And if a general clamour is a sufficient cause for parliamentary enquiry, how much more a petition from fix noblemen formally complaining of injury done themselves and their country? To say nothing of the duke of Hamilton, the first nobleman of the ancient kingdom of Scotland, or of any of the other four, who subscribed the petition, the venerable name of the earl of Stair was alone sufficient to sanctify whatever it appeared affixed to, and to secure it from the neglect of any, but a set of men, who had long set shame and decency at defiance.
How necessary ministers think it for them to have power in elections, appears from the following; which shews, that the then reigning junto were willing to sacrifice, to this great object, the liberty and happiness of every British subject.
  A D 1739, the ministry, on pretence of manning the navy, proposed an act, by which constables should have power, by a warrant from justices, to enter and search private houses at all hours, for concealed sailors. In the debate in the house of commons, an annonymous member spoke as follows.
  It is a common trick of our ministers to put a multitude of persons upon taking up their freedom in boroughs and cities before an election, with a view to their votes, every one of which may be supposed to be bought. Corporations have sometimes manfully refused to grant freedoms for such purposes; as that of Gloucester did about 1767. I took this fact from a Magazine, but have not quoted it rightly.
The number of petitions complaining of undue elections and returns was so great in the first sessions of the present parliament, that the house, of commons must have employed one long session only in settling controverted elections, without bringing in any one bill, public or private. Therefore they thought it necessary to put off all those petitions to next session. How many gentlemen may be supposed to have sat and voted during that session, who had no right to be there, and whose illegal votes did in fact render the acts made in that session null and void. See the Magazines, &c of the times.
Could a more solemn farce be acted, than that of a certain A D which shall be nameless, when the magistrates of a certain famous city were gravely reprimanded by the speaker of the house of commons, because they had proposed to their then present members to re-elect them, if they would advance a sum, not to be sunk in private pockets, but toward relieving the city from some of its debts? How the speaker could help laughing in the midst of his speech, when he reflected, that at least two-thirds of the house had obtained their seats by more corrupt means, is not easy to understand.
TO endeavour to gain an undue influence over the members ot the house of commons, is an old trick of our worst kings and ministers. It is true, they often carried things with a high hand, secure of what parliament should take well or ill. But violent measures are always dangerous, and it was uncertain how far the people's patience would bear. What was done under the umbrage of parliament had the appearance of just and constitutional government, and was likely to hold the longest. Our crafty statesmen, therefore, chose to have parliament with them as much as they could.
The sycophants, who surround our kings, tell them, all is well. Here is a parliament regularly assembled every year. And every thing of consequence is carried on according to the letter of the law, and the customs of our ancestors. The same might have been said in the time of Augustus, and all the best of the Roman emperors. There were consul?, senators, tribunes, prætors, as in the republican times. But the efficiency was all in the emperor and his court, and army. So, in our times (the present always excepted) we have seen parliaments regularly chosen  -- by bought votes, and court-influence; and regularly proceeding in the house -- according to the orders of the ministry.
  A little matter wrong in a thing of such consequence as a parliament, may do great mischief. A ministerial speaker of the house of commons may throw the whole debate into the hands of his own party, if a resolution be carried, That the member, to whom the speaker points, shall be heard. And there is nothing to hinder the passing of such a resolution in a ministerial house of commons. The custom has been for the house to decide, when a debate arose, which member was up first, unless they chose to leave it to the speaker. Attempts have lately been made to" change this custom.
The government of England has all the advantages, says Voltaire d, of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, but it is liable to their inconveniencies; so that it cannot subsist, but under a wise prince. He had come much nearer the truth, if he had said, it cannot subsist but with an incorrupt house of commons.
  A late writer says, he shall conclude the principle of parliament to be totally corrupted, when he sees too symptoms, viz 1. A rule of indiscriminate support to all ministers; because this destroys the very end of parliament as a controul to ministers, and is a general previous sanction to misgovernment. 2. The setting up of any claims adverse to free election; for this tends to subvert the legal authority, by which they sit.' How much we want of seeing these symptoms in their perfection, let the reader judge.
Nothing can be imagined more impudent, than the attempt of some among us, to lull our jealousy, which needs all the eyes of Argus, asleep, by telling us, it is impossible, that 800 lords and commons should ever take part w.th the enemies of their country, or its liberties. Do we not know, that in the four last years of queen Anne's reign, a majority in the house of commons, and a very great number in the other, were in the interest of France and the pretender, and that if that ill-advised princess had not dropped at the time she did, the nation was in the utmost danger of being sacrificed. See all the histories of those times.
The majority of the commons, A D 1709, were whigs. In the last four years they were tories. Such is the influence of the court ever the commons. For the court interposes both in the elections of members, and in their votes in the house.
How therefore judge Blackstone-could bring himself to write the following sentence, is to me inconceivable. Was the check of parliamentary impeachment sufficient to restrain the worthless ministries, who conducted and concluded- two wars in a most infamous manner, one in the memory of some, and the other of many now living, I mean the wars, which were' terminated with the disgraceful treaties of Utrecht, and of Aix-la-Chapelle? How could a man do his country a greater injury, than by thus labouring, as the judge does through almost his whole book, to pursuade, that every thing is right, when there is so much requiring redress?
  It is shocking to an Englishman to read the account given by a French author of the state of parliamentary corruption in our country. .Tell it not in Gash; Publish it not in the streets of Askalon. No sooner, says Reynel, is parliament met, than the parties are formed; the canvassing begins, and the cabals clash against one another. Those who hold the first places in the government, endeavour to gain, by the pensions, places, and favours, which are in their disposal, such members as they stand in need of. King William said, If a king of England had places enough to give, the names of whig and tory would soon be lost. Those, who are neglected, unite in violently declaiming against such as have suffered themselves to be gained, &c. 
Corruption brings a government into contempt not only with the subjects, but with foreigners. A D 1735, in Walpole's dirty administration, the French shewed such a contempt for England, that they published an edict, commanding all English subjects in France, to quit France in a fortnight, or enlist in their army, on pain of the gallies. To the same cause was owing the Spanish insolence, which they carried to such a height, that when they cut off capt Jenkin ear, they bid him carry it to his king, and tell him they would serve him so, if they could. To the same cause may be ascribed the insolence of the French, A D 1748, in demanding (and, O shame to Britain! obtaining) hostages at the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle; and their violating that treaty by hostilities, before it was well signed and sealed. Would France, or Spain, have dared to treat England so in the days of Cromwell or of Pitt? But parliament defended Walpole and the Pelhams as strenuously as they would the wisest and best ministers. Very different from the spirit of the following, which speaks the sense of every free and honest man, who has ever thought on the subject.
A wise and good prince will always agree with an incorrupt parliament; and then the nation might see, with satisfaction, Sir Arnolds whimsical idea realized. But it is easy to imagine a condition of things, in which Athanasianism would be as little desirable in the state as in the church. I mean, supposing a weak, a wicked or a too ductile prince on the throne, a designing court, and a house of lords and commons attached to its villainous interests and views by places, pensions, bribes, contracts, lotteries, and promises. In such a state of things, all men of honest arid independent principles will ever be professed heretics.
  It is said, we have lately got a new state officer, called, The minister of the house of commons, which, being interpreted, signifies, I suppose, the Noseleader, of that august assembly. It is always to be understood, that I mean no reflection upon the present times, which are always immaculate, while they are present. But we have in the Lond Mag 1767, an account of this officer, as follows.
Many ages have passed since the first tampering with parliaments. It is not easy to understand how a wicked court should be able to mislead a parliament without money, or other baits; but we have instances of it. In antient times our members of the house of commons were very ignorant, poor, and brought up by the priests with notions of slavish submission to their barons or to their kings. The commons, therefore, too often consented to their own deception and enslaving. In more enlightened times our parliaments have bee>> fairly bribed with places, pensions, contracts, lotteries, &c.
There was a villainous packed parliament under Rich II A D 1397. The king had changed all the sheriffs, and put in wretches attached to himself. All the public offices were put into the hands of his creatures. The king nominated the members for each place, and the placemen supported the king's nomination. The parliament in 1386, had obtained the removal of the villainous favourites, the earls of Oxford, Suffolk, &c. All the acts of that upright parliament were repealed, and every thing done to advance the prerogative above the laws. Many brave patriots were put to death, and the barbarous king chose to be present at some of these horrid scenes. They give up all their authority to twelve lords, and six commoners, the most devoted to the king's will.
The militia bill passed the lords, A D 1661, by which it is declared, that neither lords nor commons conjunctly nor severally, nor the people severally or representatively, have any power over the person of the king, and that the king alone has the power of all forces by sea and land, and all ships, fortifications, &c. exclusive of parliament. And that no war can, on any pretence whatever, be raised against the king. At the same time, an oath is to be taken by all lord lieutenants, deputy lieutenants, officers and soldiers, that it is on no pretence lawful to take arms against the king, or those commissioned by him, ' which seemed (say the collectors of the debates) to be giving up the constitution,' especially when it was declared unlawful to take arms against any person commissioned by the king. This was debated, but it was left in the oath, because, said those slavish peers and commoners, any person unlawfully commissioned, is not commissioned. Thus they left the liberties of England on the precarious foundation of a logical distinction.
The people in the time of Charles Ist's tyranny, petitioned for a parliament. We have seen the people, in the time of George III petition for the dissolution of parliament. In Charles's time, the people's entire confidence was reposed in the parliament. The influence of the court in our house of commons has in great measure destroyed our dependence upon it. In those times one independent parliament succeeded to another. The same spirit reigned, though the individuals were changed. In succeeding times, one set of slaves has followed another, and the same corrupt spirit run through parliament after parliament.
What a picture does the great and good Sidney draw of the corruption prevailing in England in the beginning of the reign of that prince, in his letter in answer to his friends advising him to return from his voluntary banishment on the passing of the act of indemnity.
Great opposition is always made to every bill for obliging members of parliament to give a test of their integrity from corruption. Yet we think there is no dispensing with tests of our being true churchmen. Is it then of greater consequence, that we be true to the comfortable doctrine of eternal reprobation, than that we be true to our country?
This mischievous invention has cruelly reduced the value of the revolution to the nation. Some of the worst evils of Stuart-government were the following, viz I. Governing without parliaments. But is there any difference between governing without parliament, and governing parliament itself by money? 2. Raising ship-money and other taxes without consent of the representatives of the people. What avails the consent of a set of bribed representatives indemnified of the general burden by places and pensions? 3. Corrupting judges. Corrupting the house of commons is worse. It is poisoning the fountain-head. 4. Punishing arbitrarily, and according to no written law. But may not parliaments thoroughly enslaved to a court, be expected to make cruel laws, whenever the court happens to be of a cruel disposition. And what difference is it to the subject whether he is cruelly punished by Jefferies's abuse of the laws, or by the direct injustice of the laws themselves, except, that the latter is putting him into a more unchangeably bad situation than the former. 5. Intimidating the members by fines, prisons, &c. The evil of this practice consists only in its influencing the members to vote against their country. What difference does it make to the subjects, whether parliament .is influenced to their prejudice by fear or by hope? When the Stuarts intimidated the members, that measure cost nothing to the nation. But we are obliged to pay for bribing them, to pay for the very rod, which is to beat ourselves. 6. Laying aside juries. We had better lay aside juries, than lay aside the whole efficiency, of parliament. To bribe parliament is to lay aside its whole efficiency, and make it a mere limb of the court. Besides, a corrupt parliament may be expected to enact what our courtly lawyers, some of them of no mean rank, are often preaching up, viz That juries are only to judge of the fail; the establishing of which doctrine by parliament, would produce precisely the same effect as abolishing juries by a statute. 7. Levying war against parliament. A corrupt parliament is government armed against the people. 8. Seizing the 5 members. A corrupt parliament will seize and imprison all the incorrupt members, if they find it will answer their gracious ends. And a member had better be imprisoned by a ruffian tyrant, than persuaded by a fawning minister to damn himself and ruin his country. 9. Dispensing with the laws, and making laws without consent of either lords or commons, that is, giving out proclamations, with the force of laws. But laws made, or laws repealed, by a set of profligate court-tools in St. Stephens chapel, are as far from the sense of the independent people, as the Stuart's proclamations, or dispensations. In fact, a corrupt court against an honest parliament and a brave people is nothing near so formidable as a corrupt court and parliament against a helpless people. The former case admits of a constitutional remedy; the latter leads to violence and contest between government and people.
10. But the Stuarts but the exchequer. True. And our bribing ministers have, by doling about the money which should have paid the national debt, brought public credit to the very precipice of bankruptcy.
11. The Stuarts intended to establish absolute power in the prince. They did so. And our bribing courts intend to establish absolute power in a junto of grandees, who rule elections, and direct the members when to say Aye, and when No. 12. The Stuarts intended to re-establish popery; while our corruptors mean only atheism. Here I own a difference ; popery being the worst thing in the universe, hell only excepted. So that upon the whole, I know of scarce any evil we have escaped by the revolution, popery excepted, that is not in a fair way of being brought back upon us by corruption. The Stuarts were butchers. They attacked the good lady Britannia with slaughtering knives. Our genteeler corruptors have endeavoured her destruction by poison held out to her in a golden cup; or, as a humorous writer (I have forgot who) states it, between two thieves, whig and tory, the nation is crucified.
  Suppose, in two suits of law, my first antagonist obliges the judge, by threatening his life, to give sentence against me, and my second bribes him. Am I not equally injured in both cases? The Stuarts meant a tyranny by one; the Walpolians an aristocracy. Which is worst for England? 
The corruption introduced in king William's time, on pretence of buying off the jacobites (doing a certain evil, that an uncertain good might come, overthrowing the virtue of the people -- to save the nation) was so openly scandalous, that honest Burnet remonstrated to the king upon it, with almost as much severity as the old prophet used in reproving king David for murder and adultery. And good reason he had for using severity. A Dutchman comes over to Britain on pretence of delivering us from slavery; and makes it one of his first works to plunge us into the very vice which has enslaved all the nations of the world, that have ever lost their liberties. When the parliament passed a bill for incapacitating certain persons, who might be supposed obvious to court influence, from sitting in parliament, our glorious deliverer refused the royal assent, which occasioned some severe resolutions against the advisers of that refusal, and a motion for a remonstrance to the king upon it. If king William had been as disinterested as he ought, and as he pretended, he would not have closetted members, nor promoted bribery. No man will dare damnation for the sake of doing good to others, unless he thinks to get, or keep, 4ome advantage to himself. May my soul stand upon a more secure foundation at the day of reckoning, than those of the best kings. 
Thus far this blunt honest writer. And it must be owned, that the constitution has long been only nominally government by king, lords, and commons, hut really a tyranny of ambitious and avaritious ministers, who have, in succession, enslaved and blinded their royal masters, wasted the public money, plunged the nation into inextricable debts and difficulties, multiplied places and pensions, kept up large and expensive armies in time of peace, accumulated excises, misapplied taxes, irritated our colonies, injured commerce, endangered public credit, debauched the virtue of the people, established corruption, as a necessary engine of government, over-ruled elections, defeated the very end of chusing representatives, by debauching the house of commons, the people's only Palladium against regal and ministerial tyranny, into a mere outwork of the court, by which means the sense of the nation has been, in innumerable instances, trampled upon by the pretended representatives of the people, whose duty is, to follow it implicitly.
  These are the triumphs of the whigs, oar pretended delivers from the Stuarts of tyrannical memory, and from popery, and slavery.
  
  Reflections being made against the ministry by the tories, A D 1690, a commission was appointed to enquire into the laying out of the public money. A certain number of the commons (the lords declining) were chosen by ballot, With authority to send for persons, papers, and records, and to examine upon oath. This might be of service in those times. But in an age, when the majority of the commons are corrupt, the majority of every committee must be the same, if the doctrine of chances may be depended upon.
  At the same time that France was btibir>>g Charles II's parliament, money for the same purpose came over from Spain and the Emperor to gain the members to their party.
Prodigious quantities of French gold were brought over A D 1701, supposed for bribing parliament. A strong party for France in parliament. 
  It was resolved, A D 1707, that it appears to the house that of 29,395 Englishmen, who should have been at the battle of Almanza there were but 8,660. The queen was addressed to know why. She answers, that there could no more be sent. But I think it does not appear very clear why they were not. Therefore it was moved to censure the neglect of not sending troops in time. But the censure was by the court party over-ruled, and turned into an address of thanks for the queen's care of the affairs of Spain. 
The slavish complaisance of parliament to ministers was confessed in the year 1769, when the ministry sent over to the American governors a positive promise, that, on certain conditions, the odious taxing acts should be repealed. Such was the shameless servility of the house at that time, that when it was moved by the opposition to resolve, That disorders had prevailed in several of the colonies prejudicial to the commerce of the kingdom, and to the peace of the colonies; That a principal cause of these disorders was the ill-judged and inconsistent instructions given by persons in administration to the governors of some of the provinces in North America; That directing the dissolution of the assemblies of North America, upon their refusal to comply with certain proposals of government, operated as a menace injurious to the deliberative capacity of those assemblies, and tending to excite discontent, and produce unjustifiable combinations; That it was inconsistent, and tended to expose his majesty's councils to the contempt of the colonists, to dissolve the old assemblies for not disavowing certain combinations, at the same time, that new assemblies were suffered to sit, without disavowing or discountenancing the same combinations; That it was unwarrantable, of dangerous consequence, and a high breach of the privilege of the house of commons, for any person in administration to premise to the assemblies in North America, the interposition or influence of the king or his servants with the house, in order to a repeal of taxation-acts, or to pledge the faith of the crown to those assemblies, Sec. when these resolutions were moved by the opposition, I say, such was the complaisance of the house for the ministry, whose conduct they would not suffer to be blamed, that every one of them was rejected; though there was not, probably, a man, woman, or child, in Britain who had the least doubt of their truth and justness.
Again in the year 1771, the house of commons, in a fit of complaisance for the court (if that can be called a fit, from which the patient is never clear) voted, that a member concerned in a libel should have no right to his privilege, thereby putting the guilt of a just satire on a corrupt court upon the same loot with that of felony, or breach of the peace, the only crimes, which before that time deprived a member of his privilege. By this resolution, it was observed. And according to a doctrine said to have been taught by certain judges of late, the guilt and punishment of this supposed libel, were not to come before the jury. They were only to find, whether the accused had any concern in the supposed libel, and the judges were to pass sentence. The members, who promoted this resolution, ought to have been more sure of the integrity of judges, than is posslible, in the present weakness of human nature. These were attacks upon the very foundation of liberty. 
The obsequiousness of parliament to the court, in the course of a few years, was shamefully gross. The nation tired out with raising money to be sunk in German wars for the defence of Hanover, forced Mr. Pits, the great opposer of continental connexions, into power, in spite of Geo II who was thought to attend more to the interest of his pitiful electorate, than to that of the British empire. Then the commons were for holding the purse-strings tight. The king found means to bring over Mr. Pitt to favour his continental scheme. Then the commons raised almost 20 millions per ann. to send to Germany. Geo III not being so attached to Germany as his grandfather, was desirous of restoring peace, and stopping the lifeblood-vein of the nation, before it should bleed to death. Then the commons were as obsequious to lord Bute's pacific measures, as they were before to Mr. Pitt's military quixotism. Grenville thought proper to lay the stamp-tax on our American colonies. The worthy commons voted it accordingly. Grenuille's successor in power thought proper to repeal the American stamp-act. The ductile commons repealed it. Their followers thought it necessary to lay taxes of other kinds upon the colonies. The obsequious commons were still occasional conformists.
Every speech from the throne, I mean, the minister's throne, at the end of every session, is filled with the king's entire approbation of all the proceedings of the sessions; whilst, if you look into the debates and protests, you see such shameful servility to the ministry, as it is impossible for any honest man to approve, say rather, to avoid execrating. And every echo of every king's speech from the houses celebrates every step of his administration to the skies. Look into the history of every reign, and you see innumerable neglects and blunders (to say nothing of corrupt abuses) committed by every succeeding administration. Thus do our superiors endeavour to persuade us, by their words, that they are gods, while their actions shew them to be generally very silly, and very worthless mortals.
  In the year 1770, there were as many compliments bandied between the court, and parliament, as ever. Yet at that time, almost every part of the British empire was known to be dissatisfied; the people of England enraged against their representatives, and petitioning the king for a new parliament; the people of Ireland offended on account of the prorogation of their parliament, because they would support the constitutional manner of taxation, and the colonists provoked by our legislature's taxing them as a test of their obedience.
  In that same year, Sir George Savile, no party-brawler, said in the house of commons, 'This house hath betrayed the rights of the people.' Sir Alex. Gilmour called him to order. General Conway laid the words were reprehensible. That it was insulting parliament, and that members had been sent to the Tower for such words, but as he believed they were spoken in anger, he only should wish that for the future the gentleman would be more cautious. Sir George Savile replied, he had not spoke in anger; that he never used any other words, when he mentioned the proceedings of the house upon the Middlesex election; and that he would always use the same words, whenever the same question was in agitation. Mr. Glynn defended the words. He observed, that they were the only words in our language proper to express the idea of the thing; that if spoken of a thing that did not exist, no one would be more ready to vindicate the honour of parliament, in calling to account the member who spoke them; but if they were founded on truth, it could not be the votes of a majority which could make them culpable. He then observed a good deal on what had been said the day before by a member, (M. T. DeGrey, brother to the attorney general, who abused the petitioners in general, calling them base born mechanics, and mere rabble, not fit to petition the throne) that he was sorry to find some gentlemen supposed there was one law for gentlemen, and another for their inferiors. That the law knew nothing of gentlemen; that we, who represented, were chosen by, and derived our powers from those base born men; and that their privileges ought to be the care of the house, for on them depended our own, -- our constitution. Mr. Edmund Burke, likewise, with great spirit, defended Sir George Savile, and called upon the ministry to punish Sir George, if the accusation was false. He laid, the people abhorred the present ministry, and asked the speaker if the chair did not tremble under him. Towards the conclusion of the debate, Sir George Savile stood up again and declared, that he was as cool as before; more so he could not be; and added from Shakespeare.  No notice was taken of the words.
  If opinion be the great engine, by which the few are able to govern the many, what shall we say of/he wisdom of those governors, who by the practice of every sou. and sordid art, and by openly shewing a total neglect of the public interest, teach the people to look, upon their superiors as their worst enemies, or as clumsy blockheads, who do not know the first principles of their own posession?
However it is come to pass, the fact is certain, that in no age, or nation, ever was the people's opinion of their governors at a lower ebb, than has been lately seen in a certain country. In former times, when the characters of statesmen were attacked in print, the writers used caution, and either described them by their behaviour, in such a manner as to point them out without naming them, or if they were more particular, at most they only put initials and finals. Now our political and satirical writers make no hesitation in calling our highest characters to their faces, and with their names printed at full length, rogues, and whores, corruptors, plunderers, and enemies of their country.
This I acknowledge to be utterly inconsistent with decency. But still it marks strongly the sentiments of the people. And it must likewise be owned, that a great deal of the invective, that is thrown out in times of general dissatisfaction, is always aggravated, and often wholly groundless. But had our governors kept up a conduct venerable for integrity, and amiable for disinterested attachment to the public good, the people would never have thought of treating them in a manner so openly disrespectful. Even the gross minded mob, when wrought up to the highest rage, would avoid throwing dirt upon a Socrates, a Cato, or a Hampden. 
There is (to borrow the thought of our inimitable Shakespeare concerning kings) such a majesty hems in a man of worth, as slander dares not to look upon.
From a due consideration of what this first volume alone exhibits, which is but a small part of the public abuses of the times, every thoughtful reader will see great reason for fears and apprehensions. The time to prevent public disorders is, Now, before the disorders begin. The beginning of the public disorders, we have reason to apprehend, will be, a diminution of the value of Stocks. It is the interest of every man in the British empire to prevent this diminution. The means of preventing it are, Associations for support of public credit. A model for these associations we have by looking back to the transactions of the year 1745. Public credit cannot sink, if the nation unites in supporting it; and the time for this union is Now, before it begins to totter. Should it even be found, (which God forbid) that the usual ways and means are likely, through failure of commerce, &c to come short of a sufficiency for paying the public creditors their full dividend, England has still grand resources untouched, as taxing all legacies left by others than parents, husbands and wives, introducing by degrees Sir Matth Decker's method of taxation; and lessening by degrees the number of our present tax-gatherers, reducing the devouring army, taxing saddle-horses, and other articles of luxury, and all public diversions, reducing the enormous number, and retrenching the exorbitant incomes of places, &c of all which more fully hereafter.
May a beam of celestial light directed by that efficacious voice, which of old said, Let there be light; irradiate the mind of Him, whom Divine Providence hath placed supreme in the government of this great empire that he may see the things, which belong to his and the nation's peace, before they be for ever hid from his eyes. And when, guided by that heavenly light, he sets himself at the head of a plan for reforming these, and the other abuses, which are the disgrace, and naturally tend to bring on the ruin of the state, may he find his people willing to second those views, the execution of which will obtain for him the most illustrious of all titles, viz Father of his country; and will make Britain the glory of all lands.


