Disquisitions 4
  If it be objected, that it is beneath the dignity of the august house of commons to submit their complaints against those who have been guilty of breach of their privileges, to the decision of a court of law (which the sovereign himself must do) let it be remembered, that, according to the present monstrous state of representation, a gentleman of 5000 a year, by sitting in the house of commons, in consequence of the votes of 10 beggars, acknowledges a superiority in those 10 men; for he could not have sate, if they had not empowered him. If now he should submit to those 10 constituents his part of a dispute between the house of commons and an author, or printer, or between the house, and a member who has affronted them by accusing them of corruption, I should be glad to know, whether he would do a meaner thing than he has already done in submitting to those 10 worthies, whether he shall fit in the house or not.
  It is the natural disposition of man, to overstretch whatever power he gets into his hands. It is the same incroaching disposition, that puts kings upon decision by arms, rather than by arbitration, which puts lords upon rejecting the most salutary bills, which puts them and commons upon punishing supposed offences against themselves, and which puts inferior courts Upon punishing what they call contempt. And it is easy to find somewhat plausible to say in support of an unjust claim. But after all is said, it will still be true, that a king's chusing the brutal decision of arms, rather than the rational one of arbitration by neutral powers, that a house of lords or commons, taking into their own hands the punishment of supposed offences against themselves, instead of referring them to indifferent persons, and a court of law or justice punishing whatever it pleases to call contempt against itself, instead of leaving the matter to, a jury of the supposed offender's peers, without which every punishment is irregular  --  there is no doubt, I say, that all such proceedings as these are inconsistent, not only with justice and liberty, but with civilization and police, and are the very evils complained of under tyrannical governments and among savages, not yet regulated by government,.
Lord Coke a, and many other writers, make a great matter of the houses of parliament being the sole judges of whatever concerns their own houses respectively, because they are the supreme court, and no other court can intermeddle with their affairs. And it is, by the same able writer, and others, taken for granted, that every court is to be sole judge of its own privileges, arid of offences committed against itself.
  There is no doubt concerning the supremacy of parliament, and that therefore no inferior court can, of its own authority, claim the decision of differences between^ he houses, or between one house and a supposed offender, or offenders against that house. But there is certainly a power in either house to refer to the decision of others any matter, wherein the house is itself a party. And it will then become lawful for those, to whom the reference is made, to decide. 
  It does not appear to me, that there is any thing humiliating in submitting to the decision, or arbitration, of a set of men, whether in or out of parliament, or that it necessarily implies acknowledging a superiority in those men. In a dispute between the king and a merchant, neither one nor the other thinks himself degraded by having the cause tried by the court of King's Bench, and the point determined by a jury. The cause must be tried in that court first, and cannot come before the lords, hut by appeal. And even when it is finally determined by the lords, is the sovereign degraded by submitting to the decision of his inferiors? The lords are as much his inferior| after, as before. What could be nobler, than to see a man of high rank and large fortune decline to pronounce in a dispute between himself and one of his domestics, and leaving the matter to arbitration of his other domestics?
  Supposing the house of commons elected in an adequate manner, that is, every member by about 400 men of property, I say that in submitting to their arbitration, a member would submit to his undoubted superiors in every respect. If every member submits, the house submits to their constituents. And surely it could be no degradation for them to submit a point of honour or ceremony, a matter of no national consequence, to their political creators, from whom they derive their very existence as a house. 
  Supposing it granted, that there is a difficulty either way, viz, Whether parliament takes into its own hands the punishment of offences against itself, or leaves it to arbitration by others, will any man pretend, that the difficulties are equal on both sides? Nay, will not any man acknowledge that in declining to be judges in their own cause, there is magnanimity; as on the contrary (in all private disputes at least) there, is much selfishness and arrogance in claiming to decide our own quarrels.
  It is usually said, there are customs of parliament and other courts, which themselves only understand. Are then the customs of parliament and other courts only to be explained by algebra, fluxions, or the higher geometry? Or are they matters of plain common sense? If they be not, the most innocent and uprightly-intentioned subject may fall into the great and dangerous guilt of offending against those inexplicable customs, and privileges, and may find himself suddenly in the same condition with the unfortunate failor dastied on unseen breakers in an open sea, swallowed up and lost.
   A D 1704, the lords, in their judicial capacity, determined, that a person's right to. vote for a member might be tried at law, and that the commons have nothing to do with that point, and that, by their vote to the contrary, they had struck at the liberties of the people, the law of England, and the judicial power of the house of lords. This was taking the protection of corrupt returning officers out of the hands of the house of commons. Even lord Coke, who magnifies the power of parliament as much as any writer whatever, observes, that parliaments may do wrong, of which he gives several instances. He quotes one mischievous act with a flattering preambles by pretext of which, Empson and Dudley committed innumerable oppressions upon the subjects, and the act was accordingly repealed the first parliament after the death of Hen VII in whole time it was made. 
The popish party blamed parliament for taking into custody some of the abhorrers. They said it was a matter which had no relation to privilege of parliament, signifying, that if it had, there had been no harm. We now question the doctrine of a power in the commons of imprisoning for any thing, but what stops proceedings of the house, and is done in the house. Instances were brought by Sir William Jones, of commitments of persons not members for faults not breaches  of privilege, as for exercising patents condemned by the commons, and for faults in preaching and catechizing. This however was all wrong, as superseding law. Parliaments were listened to, and thanked for detecting wicked favourites by Elizabeth. The contrary by Hen 111 and VI and Edw II and Rich II. This was the proper business of parliament, the other of the courts of law. 
The power of the house of commons to send even their own members (much more other subject) to prison without trial by jury, is to the last degree dangerous. For a house of commons may become, through court-influence, so generally corrupt, that they may see it proper to send every honest member to the tower, the moment he opens his mouth against their traiterous measures, and in favour of his country. This could not be, if every person, whether member or not, offending, or supposed to offend, against the orders of the house, were to be tried, before he could be committed, by a jury of those, who are in every respect equal to the members, I mean the people, the constituents of the members.
This shews, that privilege was not originally intended for oppression of the subject. But judge Hales collects many instances of privilege allowed to members and the servants of members upon very frivolous pretences, and to the great loss of their just creditors. Why did not the commons come to the same resolution? See many instances of punishments inflicted upon persons not members, for pretended breach of privilege, which would have come much more decently from the court of King's Bench, even though justly inflicted, which was not always the case.
Judge Hales says, both lords and commons independently have power of judicature*. Yet he says an ordinance, or resolution of one house, ' bindeth not in succession*,' unless it afterwards receive the sanction of the other branch, or branches of the legislature.
  A D 1584, Dr. Parry, for speaking freely in the house against a bill, was committed to the serjeant, brought to the bar, and obliged on his knees to confess his fault, and ask pardon, &c. 
TO prove that parliamentary privileges and prosecutions are grievances, I will add here a few, out of a great many instances I had collected in the course of my reading, of parliamentary prosecutions, very much unworthy the dignity of parliament, which will shew, that it is not easy for men going out of their proper sphere to act suitably, nor to exclude passion and prejudice from their decisions in their own Cause,
in fact, the liberty and property of free-born Englishmen are things of too sacred a nature to lie open to invasion, from the sodden resolutions of any set of men whatever. And yet greater depredations have not been committed, than those which the liberty and property of Englishmen have suffered, at the hands of kings and ministers, who have been artful enough to prevail with parliaments (naturally friendly to liberty) to become the instruments of their tyranny.
Some members of parliament, in the time of Philip and Mary, A D 1555, made a secession. Some were indicted and fined; others traversed; but the point was not decided, when the queen died.
  Mr. Taylor, barrister at law, a member, was brought on his knees in the house, A D 1631, for saying, that the parliament had committed murder with the sword of justice, in the case of Strafford. He was expelled the house, and voted incapable of ever sitting more. He was committed to the Tower during pleasure of the house; and afterwards carried to Windsor to make his recantation.
  In the time of Jam I the year not mentioned, a member, for seeming to reflect on another member, as puritanical and factious, was called to the bar, and on his knees discharged the service of the house, with an intimation, that his sentence was very merciful, because they might have imprisoned him besides.
The commons, afraid of Lilburn's party and the levellers, made them close prisoners in the Tower; but this severe order was countermanded afterwards. His printed papers were ordered to be burnt by the hangman; the sheriff to protect him: the gentleman usher of the house to search for papers of the same kind, and bring them before the house.
  Hen Marten, esq. was disabled, A D 1643 and commuted to the Tower by the house; of commons, for reflecting on the king and royal family, but afterwards restored, and the sentence erased from the Journals. Several were disabled for having been in the king's quarters. One suspended for writing a book against the Trinity. Recants, and is restored; but afterwards disabled for the same offence. Coningsby expelled for being a monopolist. Commons exclude all those members who voted for treating with the king; it is plain they thought they had power of exclusion and incapacitation. However, the people seemed pleased, for there came multitudes of addresses from all-quarters approving of their proceedings.
  Cranfield was fined 500 each to four members whom he had slandered.
Lord Seville was committed to the Tower, for refusing to name the person who had written a letter to him, which parliament had thought treacherous.
  Doctor Cary was brought to the bar of the house of peers, A D 1677, and examined concerning a MS. carried by him to the press, on the illegality of the prorogation; because he would not answer certain interrogatories, he was fined 1000 and kept in prison till be paid the money. Aaron Smith being accused of seditious words to the same purpose, and absconding, the house addressed for a proclamation to apprehend him, which the king granted accordingly.
Even the punishments inflicted by the house of peers, though undoubtedly a court, will not be submitted to without discontent, when ordered in this arbitrary manner.
  Sir J. Maynard, A D 1647, treats the house of lords with contempt, is fined 5G00 and sent to the Tower. Wanted to be tried by a jury, nor will the subjects, while a spark of liberty remains, be reconciled to any other form of trial
The commons took too much upon them, A D 1681, when they passed the vote, that the laws against recusants ought to be only put in execution against papist, and not against protestant dissenters. Their design was right, so far as they meant to favour protestant dissenters; but no single branch of the legislature has power to dispense with laws made by the united authority of all the three. They are to be regularly repealed by the same authority which made them.
When the bill to prevent double returns passed, A D 1695, some lords protested, because the commons took too much upon them, when they pretended to settle the course of elections and returns by their vote, excluding the other house, which was making themselves, contrary to the constitution and sense of the public in all ages, a court of judicature. 
  John Biddle, a school-master, was examined, A D 1654, for an Arian book. The book was burnt by the hands of the hangman. He was committed to the Gate-house, without pen, ink, or paper. Seems to have been a man of no depth. He was confined afterwards in Newgate, and then banished to the isle of Scilly. 
Parliament, A D 1650, takes up the office of criminal judges, and sentences several persons to the pillory for forgery.
  A D 16, one Sherridan, in custody of the serjeant at arms by order of the house, had moved for his habeas corpus. Refused by judge Raymond, because committed by order the house, though moved in behalf of Raymond. Sir William Jones is against bailing in case of commitment by the commons. Says the house of commons is a court of itself, and part of the highest Court in the nation, superior to those in Westminster hall, and the laws made in it, arc to bind the inferior courts, but cannot be understood to bind themselves. That it is dangerous to hinder the power of parliament (in those days the house of commons was the people). A commitment by the house is a judgment, and was never allowed to be bailable. If persons committed by the house on any account may be bailed, they may be bailed even though committed for breach of privilege, and then the house is disarmed of its necessary power. Thinks it improper to make any resolution, or give any answer to the motion in behalf of Raymond; but to leave the judges at their peril to bail persons committed by the house.
  Imprisonment by mere order of council was, in the time of Charles I found to be illegal, and contrary to Magna Charta and is likewise inconsistent with six statutes in favour of liberty made since6. By the same rule, imprisonment as a punishment, inflicted by any order whatever, without trial per padres, is illegal, This was the very tyranny of the star-chamber and high commission-courts.
Articles against Sir Edward Dering, A D 1642, were, That he had encouraged a petition derogatory from the authority of parliament; in which petition it was requested, that no member should be expelled without shewing cause; that the subjects should not be bound by any order of either house Jingly, particularly that no order concerning the militia from the commons only should be binding. All this they declared wicked and seditious; and his having said, the delivery of the petition should be by 40,000 people, and his using means to raise an insurrection for that purpose. Declared a breach of privilege of parliament. He flies from justice. Summoned to answer before the parliament. Some of the men of Kent come to the parliament with their petition, though before burnt by the hangman. Some of them were committed, the rest dismissed.
Candles called for, A D 1641, opposed by the majority. The serjeant by mistake brings them in Widdrington and Herbert, members, take them away without orders of the house: great disturbance ensues. They are called to the bar. Are ordered to kneel, They refuse; and are sent to the Tower.
  It was debated, A D 1696, whether the maces should lie on the table, as usual, while Sir J. Fenwick was under examination before the commons, and whether the sheriffs of London could have him in custody before the house. It was determined, that the mace should be held by the serjeant at arms at the bar by Sir John. He got his trial put off on false pretences, for which the commons meant to have him attainted, convicted, and executed, as a-traitor for eluding justice; upon the same principle as people are outlawed, who fly from trial, or bankrupts are made felons, who do not appear to be examined, or culprits are pressed to death, who will not plead either guilty, or not guilty. It was alledged, that attainders are suspicious ways of proceeding, and dangerous in corrupt times. They who spoke for the bill, represented the parliament as possessed of a dictatorial power to take care, ne quid detrim nti capiat respublica, and to convict dangerous men upon such evidence, as to them might seem satisfactory, though not the formal evidence, required by law, and which inferior courts are obliged to follow. If all this be true, there is, surely, the utmost necessity for an incorrupt, for an unsuspected parliament. Attainders, it was said by others, were only to be had recourse to, against those, who were not forth-coming: but Sir John was in the house. The whole was a party-affair between the whigs and the tories, and the former were desirous of mortifying the latter. Several lords protested against his attainder, because bills of attainder against persons in prison and who are therefore to be tried by law, are of dangerous consequence to the subjects and constitution; because the evidence of grand jury-men and petty jury-men, not given before the peers, was admitted, though they disagreed in their test; because information in writing was received, which prevents the witness being cross examined; because Fenwick was cast by one witness only, and him a doubtful one; and because Fenwick was not considerable enough to be proceeded against in so extraordinary and irregular a manner, justifiable only in cases of great danger. Fenwick, however, was beheaded on Tower-hill, denying to the last, all concern in the assassination plot, though he owned himself a jacobite.
Complaint made to the house, A D 1712, of a preface to some sermons of Dr. Hoadley, bishop of St. Asaph. Ordered to be burnt by the hangman. The worst thing in the preface is, the good bishop's expressing his apprehensions, and those of all the wise and good of those times, concerning the danger in which the nation was involved from a jacobite ministry.
Certain letters of Mr. Chivers, a member, were complained of, A D 1699, in the house of commons, as reflecting on, and misrepresenting several members. The house was so irritated, that it was carried 119 to 83, that he attend the house, (though indisposed) and not obeying, it was moved, that he be brought by the serjeant at arms. This, however, was over-ruled. But they resolved, That publishing the names of members, reflecting upon them, and misrepresenting their proceedings in parliament, is a breach of privilege, and destructive of the freedom of parliament.
Here follow several instances of punishments and censures inflicted by the commons on irregular proceedings in elections. Dr. Harris, for preaching about elections, was called before the house of commons, and on his knees ordered to confess his fault, and in the quarter-sessions, and in his own pulpit before sermon. Ingrey,  under-sheriff of Cambridge, for refusing the poll, was committed to the serjeant at arms, and was ordered to confess his fault there, and at the quarter-sessions. The mayor of Arundel for putting the town to great charges, not giving due and general warning, and for packing elections, was sent for by warrant, and ordered to pay the charges. Sir William Wrey, and others, deputy lieutenants of Cornwal, for assuming to themselves a power to make whom they pleased members, and defaming certain candidates; sending for train bands to be at the election, and menacing the court, under pretence of the king's pleasure, were committed to the Tower, to acknowledge their offence at the bar, and at the assize in Cornwal. Yet seizing and searching the papers of members of parliament was resolved to be breach of privilege, A D 1641.
Mr. (afterwards Sir Richard] Steele, was expelled the house, A D 1713, for reflections on the jacobite ministry in his Englishman and Crisis. All the wisest and best men in the house defended Steele, But he was expelled, because he had insinuated (what no body then alive doubted) that the protestant succession was in danger from the ministry- This prosecution, however, hurt the ministers greatly, and occasioned a great deal of searching. But ministers have great power in bringing vengeance on their enemies. And parliaments have been too busy in humouring the views of ministers. Mazarine boasted (says cardinal de Retz) that if he had but two lines of any man's writing, he could cut off his head. But to return to the proceedings against Steele: He owned he wrote what he was charged with, and with the same cheerfulness as he had abjured the pretender. Blamed for the Crisis containing several paragraphs tending to sedition, and reflecting on the queen and government. Not allowed to defend what he had written paragraph by paragraph, but generally. Nothing could be done more arbitrary in the court of inquisition. Defends himself with great address. Foley, instead of answering paragraph by paragraph, Steele's defence, contented himself with saying it was plain to every body that the writings complained of were seditious, scandalous, and every thing bad. Walpole defends him, and shews that there was great reason to be alarmed.
There never was perhaps an instance of so trifling an affair producing such weighty consequences, as that of Sacheverel, A D 1709. One would have imagined, that twenty silly bigots might have preached twenty capucinades each, and this great kingdom have remained in the same condition, as if they had never climbed their tubs. It was the fatal and ill-advised measure of solemnly impeaching the insignificant cushion-thumper (contrary to the better advice of the then attorney general Eyre, who was for burning his sermon, and imprisoning him, and even that would have been doing him too much honour) that produced the mischief, and set all England in a flame. For the good-natured people always pity the person, who is punished, however atrocious his guilt.
  A wise government will always consider maturely, which of two measures, is likely to produce the greatest good, and the least harm. But surely this thought never once entered the heads of the then ministry. For, it was manifest, on one hand, that Sacheverel's sermon was too mean a performance to produce, of itself, any effect. And what probable advantage could be expected from prosecuting, and raising to importance, the author of a production. which did not deserve the attention of any person whatever, much less of government?
  Whitehead's poem, Manners, was complained of by lord Delawar, and unanimously voted a libel, &c A D 1739. The author absconded; but Dodsley appeared. Moved, that he be taken into custody of black rod. 1 Lord Carteret pleads for him, in consideration of his surrendering, and because the author was known. Other lords spoke bitterly against both author and publisher. The chancellor (Hardwick) explains the liberty of the press. He says, it meant originally the liberty of printing, instead of transcribing. Says, there are severe statutes, unrepealed, against publishing defamatory libels in writing, before printing was discovered. Lord Talbot answered, that then the right way was, That any lord who thought ~ himself injured, should prosecute Whitehead, before a court of justice.
  A paper entitled, Constitutional Queries, was sent, A D 1751, to most persons of rank, and left upon the tables of most coffee-houses, insinuating designs against Frederic prince of Wales, and the protestant succession. It was censured by both houses, as malicious, false, &c and the king was requested to give orders for prosecuting the author, &c. But no author was ever found out.
  In the hon Alex Murray's tryal, the same year, (who had been ordered by the commons to come k to the bar of their house to receive upon his knees, his sentence of imprisonment in Newgate for breach W privilege, &c. Mr. Murray not thinking his crime worthy of a chance of catching the gael-distemper, and losing his life about a matter of privilege, had prudently kept out of the way) in the debate on this affair, I say, it was observed, that the commons, in such cases, assumed a privilege, which the king has not, (viz of punishing a subject without legal trial) excepting in the peculiar case of suspending the Habeas Corpus act, when there is an actual rebellion in the country. There was a pamphlet published, giving a full account of his case. It was read in the house of commons, and the usual black epithets of malicious, seditious, scandalous, &c. heaped upon it. 
A noble duke, who happened to be present, was so ashamed of the picture drawn of him in the pamphlet, that he made his escape out of the house. The commons addressed the king to prosecute the author, printer, &c.
Mr. Wilkes's prosecution does not properly belong to this chapter, having been carried on by the secretaries of state. Of his repeated expulsion by the house of commons, inspite of his re-election by a great majority of the freeholders of Middlesex see the sequel. I will only observe here, that in the year 1773, of 352 members, all but 50 were for reversing the determination of the Middlesex election by a bill to regulate the rights of election.
The mention of Mr. Wilkes's expulsion and reelection, calls up that of Mr. Adams, a member of the assembly of Barbadoes, who  A D 1762, was prosecuted, fined, and imprisoned for resisting the sheriff in the execution of his duty. The assembly expelled him. He was re-elected -- re-expelled. His electors insisted, that they, and not the assembly were the judges of the fitness of persons to represent them; and there was no law, by which Mr. Adams was disqualified for a representative merely for his having resisted the sheriff, though there was for punishing him otherwise, which punishment accordingly he had suffered. Mr. Adams was then formally disqualified by act of governor, council, and assembly. He appealed to the king. His disqualification was reversed, with a declaration, that it was arbitrary, and contrary to the spirit of the British constitution. But this by the way. To return: In the case of the printers, who published the debates of the house of commons, A D 1771, and were proceeded against by that house, it did not appear, that they had any legal authority for apprehending, or committing; for, though they obtained a royal proclamation against the offenders, they could not, or, however, did not oblige them to appear before them. On the contrary, the lord mayor and aldermen of London protected the printers, and obliged the person, who apprehended them, to find securities to answer for his offence. And the printers continued to publish the debates. One of the aldermen wrote to the secretary of state an account of his proceeding. And the accused printer sent the speaker the opinion of council upon the house's proceeding and the royal proclamation, viz That both were illegal, unconstitutional, and void. On that occasion, authorities were brought from history and law in justification of what was done by the lord mayor and aldermen in opposition to the house of commons as follows.
Burnett in his History of his Own Times, relates, That the commons sent their serjeant to bring before them many of the abhorrers; which brought their authority for punishing any others besides their own members, into question, because they cannot receive an information upon oath, nor proceed against those, who refuse to appear before them. Many refused to obey their summons; it being found, that the practice was no older than the days of queen Elizabeth. Again, the oath of every alderman obliges him to keep up the franchises of the city; one of which, granted by Edw. III in parliament is, That 90 summons, attachment, or execution be made in the liberty of the city, by any king's officers [consequently, I suppose, much leis by the officers of the lower house of parliament] but only by ministers [officers] of the city. The charter of Edw. IV. gives to the corporation of London, the whole and exclusive execution of all warrants, with the return of the same, by such their minister, or deputy, whom they {hall thereunto use.' And by 2 Will and Mary the corporation of London is confirmed in all its privileges and franchises; of which it is not, on any pretence whatever, to be deprived, &c.
Why does not the house of commons let the people know their privileges? Why are not those privileges established by law? When they think themselves offended, why do they not prosecute the offender in a legal and constitutional way, which would stop all reflection upon them? The king's causes are tried in the courts of justice by judge and jury, who are indifferent persons. Why is any individual, or any assembly of men whatever to be judge, jury, and executioner? in their own cause?
The lord mayor and alderman Oliver were afterwards committed to the Tower by the house of commons, who refused to hear their defence by council. Alderman Wilkes was ordered to attend the house, but he sent the speaker a direct refusal, because he was not summoned as a member, to answer in his place.
This whole proceeding of the house of commons, was condemned by many both within and without doors. And it may be affirmed, that the people of England will never, while a spark of the fire of liberty remains, be reconciled to an assumed power in representatives to imprison their constituents without tryal by jury. 
  It has been said, `How are the commons to obtain the informations necessary for making laws, or enquiring into the conduct of ministers, if they cannot oblige persons to attend?' The answer is, They certainly cannot, and therefore ought to have a power of compelling attendance as the courts have. But this has nothing to do with their assuming a power of imprisoning those who do attends or would if their attendance was required for any other purpose than that of punishing them. In fact, no inconvenience could arise, but, on the contrary, great advantage, from every court's giving up what the king must give up, viz. The claim of judging and punishing pretended contempts, or other offences, against themselves. It is a whimsical part of our political œconomy, that, if any person, or body of the subjects offends the house of commons, they take the matter into their own hands, and punish with fine and imprisonment. But if a minister has offended against the people, the commons can only impeach him before the upper house. The commons themselves punish offences against themselves; which one would rather suppose they would refer to others; and they refer to ethers the punishment of offenders against the people, whose guardians they are, which one would rather suppose they would keep in their own hands. The truth is, the proper function of the house of commons is twofold, viz Inquisitorial, and legislative; but they are ever running into the executive, which is no part of their office.
  It was argued, in defence of the lord mayor, on 'the same occasion, That the courts of law have power to enquire into the acts of the highest authority. The same celebrated judge held, that the vote of the house of commons forbidding any one to seek a legal remedy against their orders, was illegal, and he accordingly discharged the persons committed for contempt of that order.
Hakewel brings many instances of persons punished for serving members with subpœnas, writs, &c, while the house was sitting. Prosecutions against members were commonly stopped by letters issued from the house. Members, were by privilege exempted from serving as jurymen. He brings also a multitude of instances of members servants, &c. being set at liberty from arrests. A D 1640, the time of privilege was 16 days exclusive before parliament, and 15 day inclusive after.
Privilege of parliament extended not only to the persons of members, but to their cattle and other goods.
Mr. Arthur Hall, A D 1580, was committed to> custody of the serjeant, for publishing conferences of the house and afterwards to the Tower for 6 months, expelled the house, and fined 500.  He refused to retract, and was forever disabled to sit in parliament.
  I am afraid of tiring the reader by enumerating instances of such parliamentary prosecutions, as may be said to be frivolous, or arbitrary. A well constituted and upright parliament will have but little occasion to prosecute for disrespectful speeches; for no body will speak disrespectfully of an assembly of men, who shew themselves solely and sincerely attached to the public good. Or if any persons should be so rash and malignant, the general hatred or contempt, which they will certainly draw down upon their own heads, will supersede all use of prosecution by the offended persons. Or if prosecutions be necessary, let prosecution be commenced (as when offence or injury are committed against the king) in the courts of law; and let the accused be tried according to the known laws of his country, and be acquitted or condemned by the verdict of a jury. All other modes of trial are violations of the constitution.
The collection made by Petyt, in his Miscel Parl of parliamentary, prosecutions on account of disrespectful speeches, makes our ancestors appear mean-spirited. John such-a-one wished that the devil would take the parliament. Thomas-such another said, the parliament was carrying on works of darkness. A third said, he was not afraid of the pillory. What then? Was it not infinitely beneath the magnanimity of a supreme legislature to take notice of such trifles? This recals to my memory an old presentment by an inquest.
ANOTHER consequence of the inadequate state of parliamentary representation, and of too long parliaments, is a dangerous power assumed by the commons, of clearing their house, and excluding their constituents from the satisfaction of knowing how their deputies behave themselves, and whether they consult the public interest, or play the game into the hands of the ministry. Upon the same principle they found the practice of punishing all persons, who publish any speeches made in their house.
  As to the house of lords, supposing it once granted, that it is wise to allow any set of men a power of consulting for themselves, without regard to the public and putting a negative upon the most salutary national proposals, if thought by them likely to entrench upon their particular privileges (a point, the proof of which I should be sorry to have imposed on me) supposing, I say, a house of lords upon the foot of the British,. it follows, that they have a right to exclude all, but peers, from their deleberations; because they are doing their own business, and not the public; they are acting for themselves, and are principals, and not deputies. 
  But surely the faithful representatives of the people, cannot dread the people's knowledge of their proceedings in the house. An aristocracy of persons, whose interest may be different from that of the people, a court of inquisition, or a Venetian council of Ten, might be expected to but themselves from the sight of the people, but not a house of representatives assembled, by the people's order, to do the people's business. How are the people to know which of their delegates are faithful, and ought to be trusted again, or which Otherwise, if they are to be excluded the house?
Even in the house of peers, this custom has been blamed.
There were many strangers in the gallery of the house of peers, on occasion of the enquiry into lord Peterborough's conduct in Spain, A D 1711. A motion was made to clear the gallery. But the duke of Buckingham opposed it, and they were suffered to stay.
The commons, A D 1714, having cleared their house of all strangers, not excepting peers, it was moved in the house of peers, that the house be cleared of all strangers, not excepting members of the house of commons. The duke of Argyle opposed the shutting of the house of peers, and said, it was for the honour of that august assembly, to shew that they were better bred than the commons.
  Hakewel says, the commons finding persons in their house who had no right to be there, have obliged them to take an oath, that they would keep secret what they had heard.
  It was common in former times for the members themselves to publish their speeches made in the house. Accordingly there are extant to this day, many of them in pamphlets of those times, and in Rushworth's, Nalson's, and other collections. In our times it is punishable to publish any of their doings, though they do not themselves publish them; and the very gallery is cleared, that we may not know which of our deputies is faithful to us, nor which betrays us.
The order of the house of commons against printing the speeches was made, A D 1641, in times which our courtly men will hardly allow to be of good authority. The order itself is not justifiable upon any principles of liberty, or of representation, unless the debates were regularly published by the members. For published they ought undoubtedly to be; if delegates ought to be responsible to their constituents. My lord mayor, therefore, and Mr. alderman Oliver were severely dealt with in being sent to the Tower, A D 1771, for defending the printers in doing only what ought to have been done by the members. 
  A D I720,the proprietors of the redeemable funds being discontented, petitioned to be heard by council against a bill then before the house. They went in considerable numbers to the lobby, to wait the event. The justices were ordered to clear the passages. They read the riot-act. On which occasion, some of the petitioners said, It seemed to them a strange proceeding, to treat a set of peaceable subjects, people of property, who attended the house to complain of grievances, as a riotous mob; and that the commons first picked their pockets, and then sent them to jail for complaining. 
Whatever has been advanced in support of printing the Votes and Journals, is equally strong against clearing the house. The house of commons is the people's house, where the people's deputies meet to do the people's business. For the people's deputies, therefore, to shut the people out of their own house, is a rebellion of the servants against their mailers. That the members of parliament are, according to the constitution, servants, is manifest from the notorious fact of their constantly receiving usages for many centuries together, which members, accordingly, forfeited by absence, neglect, &c. Suppose the directors of the East-India company were to shut out the proprietors from their house, and then dispose of their property at their pleasure, defying all responsibility, how would this be taken by the proprietors? The excluding the people from the house of commons, a/id punishing the publishers of their speeches, is precisely the same incroachment on the people's rights; only so much the more atrocious in consideration of there being no regular appeal from parliament, whereas there is from the directors of a trading company.
  Sir John Hartop moved, A D 1681, that the votes might continue to be printed. A motion for printing the votes, A D 1688, passed in the negative. The votes of the commons were ordered to be printed, A D 1690. The gallery and speaker's chamber were cleared of strangers, on occasion of the prosecution of Mr. (afterwards Sir Richard Steele, A D 1713 s. Resolutions were made, A D 1742, to print the journals of the house of commons, which begin with Edw VII, to the number of 30 volumes, 1000 copies; which is done accordingly; I know not whether begun at that time, or afterwards. 
There was a long debate about printing the proceedings and debates of the house, A D 1738, in which it was observed, that it is a hardship for members to have their sentiments misrepresented and falsified in News-papers and Magazines, &c. 
  There was a pamphlet at this time ascribed to Walpole, which contained a history of queen Anne's tory parliament. This publication Walpole defended, because that parliament deserved to be disgraced. But who shall decide which parliament deserves to be disgraced, and which to be honoured. The sure way, in all events, is, to admit as many strangers as the galleries will conveniently hold; that the members order genuine copies of their speech: to be published; of which authenticity the hearers in the galleries will be able to judge; and then no spurious, or unauthenticated publications of speeches will be received by the people i because they will certainly chuse to read those whose authenticity is established by a cloud of witnesses. 
ANOTHER evil arising from the miserably inadequate state of representation and consequent contempt, which members acquire for their constituents, is, their taking the liberty of absenting themselves for frivolous or no reasons, and of attending very carelessly to the business of the nation, when they come to the house. Did a gentleman recollect, that at his election he received an aweful charge from an august meeting of 5000 of his countrymen, and gave a solemn promise sealed with the religion of an oath to be diligent and faithful in discharging the momentous trust then committed to him, and did he know, that those who employed him, would censure him publicly, if they found, that he did any body's business in parliament but theirs; he would tremble, at the thought of trifling with so sacred a function. But when a youth just come from Oxford remembers, that he was elected (as it is called) by a few drunken idiots in a paltry borough, and carried round the town in an old oaken chair, and that he has his place as he has his estate, or that he gave every voter five guineas; it is no wonder, that he considers the whole as a very paltry farce, which he may attend to, or neglect, as he pleases. 
  It is supposed that members of parliament have often done the business of a corrupt court by seasonably playing truant. Those gentlemen shew themselves not abandoned to all sense of shame. When the public has been betrayed by a villainous vote for an augmentation mentation of the army, or an extension of the excise laws, they did not vote wrong, they cry; they were not there. But why were they not there, to vote right, and endeavour to make others vote right? Why were they not upon duty, taking care of their country? Ah! if a man loves his young and beautiful wise, and regards his honour, he will not leave her in the hands of a known rake; or if he loves his money, he will not leave his strong box open to a thievish servant. No more will a gentleman, who loves his country, leave her in the hands of unknown persons, who may betray her. Do gentlemen consider of what consequence a few votes may be?
The oath in favour of passive obedience and nonresistence was rejected by only three votes. The bill, A D 1692, for totally disqualifying placemen for sitting in the house of commons (the best bill, surely, as to its object, that ever was brought into the house) was rejected by only two votes. The famous amendment by the lords to the bill cf Jan. 27. 1702, by which amendment it was made high treason to attempt to set aside the protestant succession in the house of Hanover in case of queen Anne's leaving no posterity, was carried by only one vote, 218 to 117 b. I have been told, that a member of that parliament, who was infirm and gouty, but proved faithful to his country in attending at the hazard of his life, often mentioned his own proceeding on that occasion with pleasure, and particularly on his death-bed. 
The ruinous act in favour of the French trade, A D 1713, was thrown out by only nine votes, viz 194. against 185. Only 9 true Englishmen in the house!
  In the end of queen Anne's reign, a place bill was lost in the house of peers for want of one vote, while one of the lords, who had too proxies in his pocket was buying a penknife.
The act A D 1728. by which a fine of 500 is enacted for asking, or receiving, by himself, or another, money, or other reward, by way of gift, loan or device, &c, for voting, or declining to vote at elections of members of parliament, was carried by only two votes, viz 91 to 89.
The motion A D 1741, for enquiring into the conduct of affairs in Walpole's 20 years reign, was carried in the negative by two votes, 244 to 242.
  To such a mockery have been reduced the most important of all earthly things, I mean parliaments. After turning them in this manner, to a farce, after laying aside all that was useful to the people in them, what step are we most likely to take next, but to lay parliaments themselves aside?  
Our ancestors were sensible of the evil of absenting, and therefore they made laws for punishing delinquent members by mulct. So among the Romans, absentees from the senate, without sufficient cause (hewn, were fineable, and obliged to give security for payment.
Thus we see, inadequate representation, and long parliaments produce in our members of parliament a contempt for the people; neglect of instructions, and refusal of responsibility, put families upon setting up for legislators from generation to generation, so that ten persons in one family may be members at the same time, and it has been found, that individuals have sate 30, 40, and 50 years in the house. Inadequate representation is one cause, why the members cannot be supposed even to know the sense or the people, as they are not chosen by the generality of the people; but by a handful. Inadequate representation deprives the greatest part of the people, both in number and property, of their weight in legislation, and gives it up, as a monopoly, into the hands of a few. It is the original cause of the commons assuming exorbitant privileges to the disadvantage of the people; of their prosecuting and imprisoning their constituents; of concealing from the people, their creators, the transactions of their house; of their absenting themselves and neglecting the business of the nation, &c.
TWO weaknesses in human nature have produced bribery, corruption, and many other wicked arts; I mean, the love of power, and the love of money. In antient times men in superior stations were drawn into many of their bad practices by the former. The latter is our disease, and a lousy disease (I ask the reader's pardon) it is. For if there be a vice incompatible with any degree of magnanimity, greediness of money is that vice. 
It is difficult to exclude corruption. Where there is any thing worth striving about, such creatures as men commonly are, will use indirect means for attaining it.
Undue influence in elections for offices prevailed at Rome so early as the 458th year from the building of the city. Which occasioned the making a law to prohibit canvassing for votes.
  But the difficulty of excluding corruption is no reason for giving over all endeavours to abolish it any more than the difficulty of living a virtuous life amidst, the various temptations, to which our frail nature is exposed, is a reason for our giving over all endeavours to regulate our conduct by the strict laws of morality. On the contrary, we must resolve to live a life of virtue, however difficult it may be, or we are undone as individuals; and we must root corruption out of the state, or we are undone as a nation. 
  Aristotle observes, That men in low circumstances did not, in his time, aspire after places of power and trust, because they were unprofitable, and they could not afford to neglect their own private affairs, to attend on the public; and that men of fortune only could properly fill those employments, because they were under no temptation to plunder their country. In our times, who have no idea of serving the public for nought, we see all men, rich and indigent, striving who shall obtain the greatest share of the public offices, because they are lucrative, and those whose fortunes are the largest, find them still too small for their extravagance, which produces the continual scramble we see.
The Polish noblesse consider their votes, for king, in the same manner as the inhabitants of our rotten boroughs do theirs for members of parliament, that is, as part of their fortune. But the wickedness of our electioneering is tenfold beyond that of the Poles. For it is no great matter who is king of Poland; because he has no power to do mischief; whereas our parliament has a power so transcendent, says judge Blackstone, that it is impossible to fix its limits. Therefore, to vote for a candidate, who gives a bribe, is selling our country to a man, who has prove himself a knave, and giving him power to do infinite mischief, for which he is not responsible or punishable. 
Bad ministers, in our times, thrust themselves into power chiefly with a design of filling their pockets, and advancing their families and friends. And it is much to be lamented, that there is such ample opportunity for them to gratify their exorbitant desires. It is universally allowed, that a British ministry has the disposal of several millions annually of the public money. And the reader may judge what opportunity there must be for them to chip off fragments and corners from such prodigious masses, without the public's being ever acquainted with facts in so particular s manner as to convict a minister, or his tools, of the plunder they have committed.
  As parliament is the natural check upon the wicked measures of kings and courts, parliaments must be managed to obtain their connivance at the proceedings of kings and courts. Therefore in former times the court not being possessed of the necessary funds, wheedled, or bullied them; now they make use of (what they think the surer means, viz) bribing and buying them. And our ministers, since the revolution, have carried this liberal art so far, as to study no other system of politics, or government, than finding out proper men for their purpose, and filling the house of commons with them; and the whole difference between one ministry and another, is that one junto has a better knack at managing parliaments than another.
The chief materials, by which a minister keeps up an ascendency in parliament, are, 1. The prodigious sums of public money, of which he has the disposal. 2. The innumerable places in the customs, excise, salt-duty, &c, and in the navy, army and church, the greatest part of which are at the disposal of the minister.
Latter times have thrown into the ministerial scale a weight unknown to former ages; I mean the national debt. The anxiety of the public creditors, the proprietors of the funds, about public credits is a powerful cause of their shewing a reluctance against all proposals for salutary alterations, or restorations. But their reasonings on this subject are not sounder than it would be for the inhabitant of a crazy building to oppose all repairs, and to insist, that the best way for preventing his mansion from coming in ruins upon his head, is to let it fall. Of which more fully hereafter.
The revenue of the civil list which is nominally 800,000 per annum, but, by means of a demand from time to time of half a million to pay off its pretended deficiencies or debts, is really near a million (in the last reign it often exceeded a million) must throw a prodigious power into the hands of those who have the disposal of it.
  A million per annum would maintain 200 dukes, at 5000 a year each, or 250 earls at 4000 a year each, or 1000 gentlemen at 1000 a year each. It would support arts, manufactures, and commerce to the inconceivable advantage of the public, &c.
  But the civil list revenue is not reckoned above one third part of what a minister has in his disposal. It is not therefore to be wondered, that a minister has great influence in parliament. If one considers into how many purses, of 100 guineas each, the prodigious sum of three millions may be divided, at first glance one would conclude, that a minister could give such a purse to every man upon the island.
The royal prerogative has been greatly curtailed since 3 Car I the date of the petition of right. Star-chamber, and high commission court abolished, with martial law, and the prince's power of levying taxes without parliament; disuse of the forest laws; abolition of military tenures, purveyance, and preemption; the establishment of the habeas corpus act; the act for frequent parliaments ;. the assertion of the liberties of the people by the bill of rights, and act of settlement; the exclusion of certain dependents on the crown from seats in parliament; the independency of the judges; the restraining of the king's pardon from being pleaded to parliamentary impeachments; the dependency of the crown on parliament, by its being stripped of its antient properties, &c  --  these, and other entrenchments on the regal power and prerogative would seem sufficient to clip the wings of kings and ministers, and to secure the state against the innumerable evils of corruption. But what avail these seeming enlargements of our liberties, if we consider (as even judge Blackstone himself, no unreasonable complainer, observes) that though the appearance of court-power is taken away, the reality remains, and is perhaps greater than under Jam I only it shews itself now in the milder and less startling shape of influence, instead of that odious and formidable one, of prerogative;  -- - an influence, however, to considerate minds not the less dreaded on account of its apparent gentleness. Let it be considered, that our monarch's revenues being settled for life, a rapacious and corrupt court (for what do men generally propose by going into court, but filling their pockets? has the disposing of the greatest part of a million a year, civil list revenue. Let it be considered, what a multitude of officers created by, and removeable at the pleasure of the court, are employed in raising10 millions a year in taxes, customs, excises; commissioners, and innumerable officers in every port of the kingdom, nay at every creek into which a smuggling boat can be thrust; commissioners of excise, and their numerous subalterns, in every inland district; postmasters, and their servants in every town, and upon every public road; commissioners of stamps, and distributors ; officers of the salt-duty; surveyors of houses and windows; receivers of land-tax; managers of lotteries; commissioners of hackney-coaches; besides frequent accidental opportunities of conferring favours, as by preference in loans, subscriptions, tickets, remittance of public money, &c which attaches those most, whose attachment is the most desireable to the court, I mean, the opulent, and leading part of the people; to which add the prodigious influence the court gains by having the power of officering an army of above forty thousand men; to say nothing of the formidable force of such a body of disciplined men against a flock of sheep, I mean the helpless people. This dreadful army, the court- sycophants pretend is kept up only from year to year: but it is universally looked upon as on a footing equally certain with the army in France. Accordingly gentlemen bring up their sons as regularly to the army, as to the church. These forty thousand men are paid by the court, raised by the court, officered by the court, commanded by the court. Add to all this, that the court must have innumerable ways of misapplying the public money to the purposes of gaining undue influence, which even the most faithful and upright parliament could not detest. And what then must be the case, if we suppose parliament itself (the only constitutional check on a corrupt court) a sharer in the plunder of the people, and therefore interested to conceal, or connive at the ravages made by a profligate court.
  See the lord keeper North's account of abuses in the conduct and disposal of the public money in the time of king Ch. II. Those who, in our times, are the conductors of the same kind of dirty work, may compare the modern ingenious ways and means with those of their worthy predecessors.
Among others, pretended want of money in the treasury, in order to have a pretence for giving an exorbitant price for necessaries. Lending the crown at 8 per Cent, money which was raised at 5 and 6. Paying with the public money, pretending it to be private, and taking interest. Depreciating the public debts and funds, buying them of the holders at half their worth, and afterwards by interest getting them paid in full. Pretending to give up all power in recommending to places for a consideration, and then insisting on recommending still, and so getting both ways. Rolling over losses upon the crown, or public, while the gain was to sink into private pockets. A father stopping a large sum in his own hand, which was to have been paid the public creditors. Before he can be brought to account, he dies. The money sinks into the pocket of his heir. He obtains a pardon of all his father's debts. Gross frauds in office found out. Then new offices and salaries set up as checks. The new prove as great knaves as the old, and form a scheme of collusion and mutual understanding. But the public pays for all, and the power of the court is strengthened. An old placeman begs leave to sell. Pockets the money, and by and by, through interest, gets a new place gratis. Extravagant men squander their own money in their public employments of embassadors, governors, &c, and charge the public with more than they have really spent, while what they really spent was 10 times more than necessary. The business of old offices transferred to new: but the profits of the old still kept up, though become sinecures. An old servant of the public retires upon a pension. He who succeeds him, by interest, gets it continued to him. Another gets an addition to his salary, and then sells his place for a great deal more than it cost him, and so an additional load is laid on the public: for the addition must be continued, because the place was bought. An annual sum is granted by the public for a public use, as keeping up a harbour, or the like. A private man, by interest, gets a grant of the job; the public concern is neglected, and the public pocket picked. Crown lands perpetually begged and given away to strengthen the court interest. The crown constantly kept in debt, and parliament solicited to pay those debts occasioned merely by the voracity of the court. Commanders of fleets order a superfluous quantity of stores. By collusion between them and the store-masters, this superfluous quantity is fold again to the king, and the money sunk in their pockets. Sometimes the store-masters gave receipts lore more than was received into the king's stores, and the money was divided among the plunderers. The king's works done by the day, whereas it would have been cheaper by the great. Money pretended to be coined gratis. Lists of large sums newly coined produced. But the contrivance was to make the pieces equal, and then the too heavy pieces were carried back to the mint, and the profit sunk in private pockets, &c.
Secret service is a huge cloke thrown over an immense scene of corruption; and under this cloke we must not peep. Our court-men tell us, there must be large sums expended in this way, and those, sums cannot be accounted for; because the services done for them must never be known. But we find, that the commons, A D 1708, addressed queen Anne for accounts of pensions paid for secret service to members of parliament, or to any persons in trust for them; and that 'the queen ordered said account to be laid before the house.
  Contracts are a great fund of ministerial influence. It is well known, that our ministry do not accept the most reasonable offer; but the offer which is made by those, who have the greatest parliamentary interest; and that in war time, every man, who furnishes for the government, is enriched; in France the contrary; which shews, that we manage our public money much worse than the French ministry do theirs. In the late war it is notorious, that several of our purveyors and commissaries got estates sufficient to set them up for earls and dukes.
  It was alledged in the house of commons by Mr. Seymour, that in the lottery of 1769, 20,000 tickets had been disposed of to members of parliament, which sold for near 2 premium each. This was a scramble of 40,000 among the members at one dash. We need not wonder, that lotteries are a favourite species of ways and means. Mr. Seymour, A D 1771, moved, that the names of the subscribers to the then present lottery should be laid before the house.
  In a committee on the lottery bill, Mr Cornwal moved for leave to bring in a bill to prevent any members having more than 20 tickets, in his own name; and that those, who had subscribed for more, should refund into the exchequer the sums so gained by them He observed, that 200 annual tickets put 400 a year into the pocket of a member, which is better than 800 a year by a place; because it did not expose him to the expence of being re-elected, nor to expence, or duty, attending the place [for some places are not sinecures],
Our courtly gentlemen labour to persuade us, that parliamentary corruption has never been that formidable evil our patriots have represented it. Facts are stubborn. They will speak; and they will not always speak as our sleek courtiers would wish them. If they will speak, let them speak. Magna veritas, et prœvalebit. 
  Ministerial artifice, for corrupting parliaments, has been applied in too ways, 1 To over-ruling elections, and 2. To byassing the votes of members in the house. 
  To shew the good people of Britain how their great and weighty concerns are managed, I will give a brief account of some remarkable controverted elections, and facts relating to that subject, which have occurred to me in the course of my reading, with reflections.
  In modern times, every body is rushing into the house of commons. In former days, it was a privilege to be. exempted from the burden, of being elected, or contributing to the wages of members, Does not this fact alone demonstrate, that those who strive to get into the house, intend the filling of their pockets merely? It was as much, and more, an honour to be in parliament in former times, than in ours; but it was not so lucrative. Does any man buy without a view of selling? And how are the buyers of seats in parliament to re-imburse themselves; but out of the plunder of a wretched and almost bankrupt nation?  
Candidates for seats in the house of commons pretend that they lay out their thousands in electioneering, in order to obtain -- not a place or a pension -- but honours and an opportunity of serving their country. But do they seriously expect any man to believe this, who sees them trampling upon honour and honesty, bribing, gambling, rooking ? Is that honour worthy of the name, which is got by the most dishonourable means? Is it serving our country to debauch our country? When those men get into the assembly of legislators, what do they for their country? What grievances have been redressed by the innumerable multitude of members of parliament, who have, since the revolution, obtained feats in the house by unwarrantable means? What greater grievance can be imagined than the continuance of this ruinous practice? I lay nothing of damnation, as a consequence of debauching a whole people, and promoting the interest of the enemy of mankind in the world; though I might say, that our bribing candidates ought, upon every prudential principle, to be absolutely certain that no such consequence can follow; and that either there is no future state, or that men are not accountable for their actions, and
that that their moral characters are (as Epicurus and Lucretius teach) entirely indifferent to the Supreme Governor of the universe. But of this more hereafter.

