Disquisitions 2
  March 18, 1742, a bill for regulating elections for cities, and boroughs, was put off for a month. The author of Faction Detected By Facts, thus accounts for the loss of this popular bill: The plain English of all this is, that a majority of the members of both houses were, thirty years ago (not in our golden days) so sordidly selfish in their dispositions, that rather than lose a trifling privilege or profit, they would suffer their country to sink in a quick-sand of corruption. It is to be hoped, that this shocking account of the state of patriotism thirty years ago, was not true. But however the truth may have been, .it is particularly remarkable, that an author, who wrote on purpose to shew, that the clamour of the people was groundless, should incautiousiy confess, that the majority of the legislature was so execrably corrupt,
Lord North and Grey was against the union, because Scotland was to have twice the number of representatives, and to pay only half the tax paid by Wales, though Wales was as poor, and much less in extent. Lord Hallifax answered, that Cornwal did not pay above one fifth of what Glocestershire did, and sent five times as many members.
  A state or commonwealth, says Milton b 'is a society sufficient of itself in all things conducible to well-being and commodious life.' Will this definition answer to Britain as parliaments now are? when all depends on a set of men authorised by a very small minority both as to numbers and property.
  It is a common maxim in politics, that in every state there must be some where an absolute and irresistible power over the people. But this is to be rightly understood, or it will lead to mistakes. In a monarchy, as France, the whole power is in the king against all other voice. This is proper tyranny. At Venice it is in the nobles exclusively. This is proper aristocracy, or oligarchy. In Holland (excepting some errors and deviations) the whole power is in the states, that is, or should be, the people; but it does not descend low enough, and leaves the bourgeoisie considerably enslaved. In England the whole power is in king, lords, and commons. Therefore in monarchies the people, the chief object, have no share of power. In oligarchies the people have as little, In republics the people have a share of power. But in our mixed government the people are swallowed up in king, lords, and commons. To say, therefore, that there must be in every country an absolute power somewhere over the people, and in which they are to have no share, is making the people mere beasts of burden, instead of what they arc, viz the original of power, the object of government, and last resource. Our courtly people, therefore, to quiet our minds on this subject, tell us, we have a very great share in governing ourselves, as we elect our law-makers. We have seen what this amounts to. And if any Englishman is satisfied with the view I have given of parliamentary representation, I can only say, he is thankful for small mercies.
There will be occasion to exhibit much more on this subject in the following chapters on Corruption, Sec.
THE monstrous inequality of parliamentary representation has not escaped unobserved. And there have been attempts made to reform it. He afterwards shews (contrary to the common objection, that this deviation must not be corrected, because such correction would produce a violation of the constitution) that restoring adequate representation, would be precisely what is wanted toward establishing the constitution on its true and original principles. This irregularity of representation strangers stand amazed at, and every one must confess, needs a remedy, though most think it hard to find one, because the constitution of the legislative being the original and supreme act of the society antecedent to all positive laws in it, and, depending wholly upon the people, no inferior power can alter it and therefore the people, when the legislative is once constituted, having, in such a government as we have been speaking of, no power to act, as long as that government stands; this inconvenience is thought incapable of a remedy.
  Salus populi suprema lex, is certainly so just and fundamental a rule, that who sincerely follows it cannot dangerously err. If therefore the executive, who has the power of convoking the legislative, observing rather the true proportion, than the fashion of representation, regulates, not by old custom, but true proportion, the number of members in all places, that have a right to be distinctly represented, which no part of the people, however incorporated, can pretend to, but in proportion to the assistance it affords to the public; it cannot be judged to have set up a new legislative, but to have restored the old and true one, and to have rectified the disorders, which the succession of time had insensibly, as well as inevitably introduced. For it being the interest, as well as the intention of the people, to have a fair and equal representative, whoever brings it nearest to that, is an undoubted friend to, and establisher of the government, and cannot miss the consent and approbation of the community. Prerogative being nothing but a power in the hands of the prince to provide for the public good in such cases, which depending upon unforeseen and uncertain occurrences certain and unalterable laws could not safely direct; whatsoever shall be done manifestly for the good of the people, and establishing the government on its true foundation, is, and always will be, true and just prerogative. The power of erecting new corporations, and therewith new representatives, carries with it a supposition, that, in time, the measures of representation might vary, and those places have a just right to be represented, which before had none, and by the same reason, those cease to have a right, and become too inconsiderable for such a privilege, which before had it. It is not a change from the present state, which perhaps corruption, or decay, has introduced, that makes an inroad upon government; but its tendency to-injure and oppress the people, and to set up one part, or party, with a distinction from, and unequal subjection to the rest. Whatsoever cannot but be acknowledged to be of advantage to the society- and people in general, upon just and lasting measures, will always, when done, justify itself, and whenever the people shall chuse their representatives upon just and undoubtedly equal measures, suitable to the original frame of the government, it cannot be doubted to be the will and act of the society, whoever permitted or caused them to do it.
Mr. Locke hints, in this passage, the propriety of our kings applying their prerogative to the, restoring of a more adequate representation. Nor is there any thing unreasonable in the proposal; since it is notorious, that a great part of the monstrous disproportion of representation in parliament, is owing to the caprice of our crowned heads in opening the house of commons to numbers, who had no original right to enter it. And if, in order to restore the balance, we were to disfranchise 30 or 60 of the beggarly boroughs, we should do nothing unprecedented. Where are now the members for those places? If our former kings and queens filled and emptied the house of commons at their pleasure, why should not our modern crowned heads have power to set right what they set wrong, either by diminishing (with consent of parliament)the exorbitant number of borough members, or increasing the representation of the counties, adding members to London, and Southward, to Bristol, to Liverpool, See or by some means, or other, take legislation out of the hands of the beg-, gars, and put it into those of men of property.
  Brady a mentions resolutions of the house of commons, That in all places, where there is neither charter, nor immemorial custom, to the contrary, every householder has a right to vote for members. In some instances, prescription for confining the right of election to the bailiffs and capital burgesses, excluding householders in general, have been disallowed by the house. But the resolutions of the house on this, as on many other points, are often inconsistent. Brady (who shews great fear lest the people should have any liberty, or power) thinks the commons founded this resolution so favourable to the people, on a mistake as to the sense of the phrase, communitas eivitatum et hurgorum; which meant, he thinks, the governing part of cities and burghs, not the housholders in general. But surely it is more for the advantage of liberty, that election be in many, than few, hands as it is harder to bribe many than a few.
Did the learned judge consider, what he himself has observed, that the borough-members are four times as numerous, as the county-members; that a few thousands of electors send in the majority of the house; that in many places a handful of beggars sends in as many members as the great and rich county of York, or city of Bristol? Did the learned judge consider these shocking absurdities, and monstrous disproportions, or did he consider the alarming influence the court has in parliament, when he wrote what follows, viz  If any alteration might be wished, or suggested in the present frame of parliaments, it should be in favour of a more complete representation of the people.' What! are we to be put off with a cold If, in a case where our country lies bleeding to death? * If any alteration might be wished' --  Let us go on then, and say, If the deliverance of ourselves and our posterity from destruction might be wished; if any alteration of what must bring us to ruin might be wished -- any alteration from a mockery rather than the reality of representation --  any alteration from 300 placemen and pensioners sitting in the house of commons -- any alteration from a corrupt court's commanding the majority of the elections into the house, and of the votes, when in it -- any alteration from the parliament's becoming a mere outwork of the court -- If it is, at last to be doubted, whether the saving of our country is to be wished; what must become of us? Had a hackneyed court-hireling written in this manner, it had been no matter of wonder. But if the most intelligent men in the nation are to endeavour to persuade the people that there is hardly room for a wish; that there is scarce any thing capable of alteration for the better, (the judges four volumes are a continued panegyric) at the very time when there is hardly any thing in the condition, it ought to be in, at the time when we have upon us every symptom of a declining state, when we are sinking in a bottomless gulf of debt and corruption, the spirit of the constitution gone, the foundations of public security shaken, and the whole fabric ready to come down in ruins upon our heads --  if they who ought to be the watchmen of the public weal are thus to damp all proposals for redress of grievances -- Quo ressumma loco? In what condition is this once free and virtuous kingdom likely soon to be.
  WHERE annual election ends, slavery begins.  A maxim of equal solidity in politics with that of my late amiable friend Dr. Foster in divinity, viz 'Where mystery begins, religion ends.' Long parliaments are incompatible with liberty. To give a set of men power for a long period of time, is giving them the hint, that they may make themselves despots, if they please. Kings and grandees are tyrants only because they know they have their power during life. But of the danger of inveterate power I shall have occasion to treat more fully hereafter.
Parliaments, according to Postlethwayte, were originally annual; and antiently all the people voted at elections, till Henry VI enacted, that only freeholders residing in the country, and who had an income of 40 a year, should vote. 
  In the Saxon times it cannot well be supposed, that parliaments could be longer than annual, were it only for one reason, viz That the members of their wittena gemots, or parliaments, were mayors, or officers, who held their offices only one year, at the end of which they were obliged to divest themselves of all power, and to assemble the people for new election. It was agreed, that a parliament should be held twice every year at London, and this continued from king Alfred's time to that of Edward II as appears by Horn's Mirr Of Just A D 1378, a parliament was called, because, among other reasons, it was constitutional, that parliaments should be held annually. The commons, A D 1940, regret, they had not made parliaments annual, instead of triennial. By two statutes, they say, they found parliaments once a year still in forced. When the triennial bill was established, in the time of Charles I after an intermission of 12 years, the king, in the genuine spirit of a Stuart, made a merit of his agreeing to the bill. The commons would not allow it; but insisted, that there were then in force two statutes for annual elections. 
  Sir William Wyndham, in the debate on the repeal of the septennial act, A D 1734, gives the true account of this matter. At the time of the revolution, says he, nay at the present time, at all times, the word parliament in the common way of speaking comprehends all the sessions from one election to another. That this is the common meaning of the word, I appeal to every gentleman in this house; and for this reason those patriots, who drew up our Claim Of Rights, could not imagine that it was necessary to put in the word new; they could not as much as dream that the two words, frequent parliaments, would afterwards be interpreted to mean frequent sessions of parliament, but the lawyers, who are accustomed to confound the sense of the plainest words immediately found out that a session of parliament was a parliament; meant only frequent sessions. This quirk the lawyers found out immediately after the revolution;  this quirk the courtiers at that time caught hold of; and this set the people anew upon the vindication of their rights, which they obtained by the triennial bill. By that bill the right of the people to frequent new parliaments was established in such clear terms, as not to be misunderstood, and God forgive them who consented to the giving it up. 
The answer given by the king (that is, the minister) to the remonstrances requesting the dissolution of a supposed corrupt parliament, A D 1770 was, That the remonstrances were disrespectful to his majesty, injurious to parliament, and irreconcileable with the principles of the constitution. It were to be wished, that the public had been better satisfied of the justness of this answer. Does not the very idea of petitioning imply acknowledgment of superiority in the person addressed to? Were not the remonstrances addressed to the king by his titles of sovereignty? Was not an appeal to the sovereign from a supposed corrupt ministry and parliament doing honour nay, was it not doing isle highest honour in the power of the remonstrants, to the throne, and to the person of the king, as supposing, that from him alone there was hope or redress? Again, what injury to parliaments in general was done by requesting the dissolution of a particular parliament? If the members had acted uprightly, it was to be expected, that their constituents (if free) would immediately re-elect them, which instead of disgrace, would have reflected the highest honour upon them. If indeed it had been confessed that many members, from a consciousness of their corrupt practices, had reason to fear the loss of their seats, the case was otherwise: but this was too shameful to confess. Or if it had been said, that a majority of the electors, being dependent on their members, or obnoxious to bribery, would of course have rechosen the same men, at "worst the dissolution of the parliament would have been nugatory. But it would have shewed the people, that the king was willing to listen to the request of 60,000 of his subjects. Lastly, as to the remonstrances being irreconcilable with the principles of the constitution; it is strange that there should be any thing unconstitutional in requesting the king to do what the constitution gives him a power to do at any time; what William III did in compliance with a petition from one county; what George II did without solicitation, and without bjame, when he dissolved one of his parliaments at the end of the 6th session, with the view, according to some, of preventing the irregularities of a long electioneering time. It is strange that there should be any thing unconstitutional in the king's dissolving a parliament at the request of 6 times the number and 60 times the property that made them a parliament. It is strange, that there should be any thing unconstitutional in dissolving a parliament which had sat several years, when we know, that the length of parliaments is one of our greatest grievances, and that our kings could not any way more effectually shew themselves to be the friends of the constitution, than by regularly dissolving every parliament at the end of the first session.
Parliaments seldom sat, in former times, many months. 'In one year there were sometimes 2, sometimes 3 parliaments, says Sir Simon Dewes on the poll-tax before the lords in 1641. The longest parliament ever yet held viz almost a whole year, under Hen. IV was three times prorogued, which was then an innovation. An act was made Edw 111 cap 14 for holding parliaments yearly, or oftener, if necessary. Again by Edw. 111 cap loc.  They knew not, in those days, the fashion of prorogations. Therefore parliaments then were annual. The unthinking people of Charles Il's. time were contented if there was no interruption of parliaments, longer than for three years. Henry Vlths reign was the first in which prorogations began to be made for any time, and they were but very little used till Hen Vlllths time. The usual way formerly was to call a parliament at least once a year, and as soon as the business was done, to dissolve them d. Henry VIII first lengthened parliament beyond three years, as the most effectual means for rendering the members obedient to his will. Annual parliaments were restored by Philip and Mary, after an intermission of two years.
  Charles, AD 1640, makes a mighty merit of giving his assent to the bill for triennial parliaments, before any subsidy granted to him. Great joy, and both houses waited on the king with thanks. This salutary law was repealed 16 Car II therefore is not in the Statutes At Large. The purport of it is to restore the laws by which parliaments ought to be held annually. It enacts, that if the chancellor does not issue out writs, any 12 peers shall in the king's name; failing them, the sheriffs, mayors, bailiffs, &c shall cause elections to be made; they neglecting, the electors shall proceed as if writs had been regularly issued. It had been happy, if the people had been constituted with authority to make laws, when the legislature did not their duty. The preamble to the repeal of this salutary law, puts it upon the derogation it is from the king's prerogative. As if the salus populi, were not of infinitely more consequence than the king's prerogative, whose only value is its usefulness to the people. 
The army demanded, AD 1647, that parliaments should be triennial, and the dissolution of them not in the king's power. A representative according to the Contributions respectively paid to the public by counties; and that improper members be expelled a. The army at this time seem to have been the most reasonable set of men in the nation. Before Charles I's time the members of the house of commons never dreamed of their having power to continue themselves in office one hour beyond the time limited by their constituents.
The author of Histor  Essays On The Engl Consti  is too severe against the long parliament which opposed Charles I They certainly meant honestly, having no byass to draw them from the public, interest though they sat too long, fearing, perhaps, that their successors might not be as faithful as themselves. It was much more clearly disinterested than the protracting of parliament from triennial to septennial for the pretended fear of a jacobite parliament. He says it was madness in the people to rejoice the king's consenting, for 600,000. raised for him, not to dissolve parliament without their own consent. This was the first protraction of the period of parliament, and taught ill-designing ministers to imitate it. It is an evil of kingly government, that through fear of tyranny, well meaning people have often consented to what was unconstitutional. So in the alteration from triennial to septennial, jacobitism, or an attachment to a race of kings, was the cause of the irregularity.
The triennial bill was repealed, A D 1664, and instead of it a law to prevent parliaments having vacations of more than three years a. One would think all memory of James 1. and Charles I was miraculously obliterated out of the minds of the people of England. It was but 15 years before that Charles I was beheaded; and the people (or the parliament at least) were for trusting their all again to kings. The long, or pensioned parliament meets 1661, agreeable to the court, and says Rapin, without doubt by the influence of the court. Great part were high church men and royalists. Pensioning begun afterwards, tho' at the beginning of this parliament they shewed a great partiality for the king. The commons threw out a bill for shortening parliaments. The lords fend down another: Rejected likewise, A D 1693 Parliaments were made triennial by 6 William Vl cap 2. In that reign they were often dissolved at the end of the first session. 2 George 1 they were made septennial. The pretence was, the danger of a Jacobite house of commons: The real reason, that they, who were in power, chose to continue in power. The triennial bill receives the royal assent, AD 1694. And the historian observes, that if our good king had not done it that day (queen Mary just taken ill of the small-pox, of which she died) it is probable he never would have given it the royal assent. So indifferent are even our best kings about bills tending to the enlargement of the people's liberty. At the same time, it must be owned, William had some reason to dread a change of parliaments. The abbe Reynel tells us, that when this triennial bill was under consideration, queen Mary desired Jord Bellamont, her treasurer, to oppose it. He refused. He was desired only to be neutral. He proved, on the contrary', very active in promoting the bill. The queen dismissed him from his post. He retired to privacy and frugality. The queen, overcome by his obstinate virtue, offered him a pension. He declined it, saying, He had no right to a reward, as he did no service. It is wonderful, that George I should so easily obtain the repeal of so favourite an act. A strong clause was added by the lords to the bill of rights, excluding effectually al popish successors to the throne. Passed easily by the commons, which looks as if the tory and popish parties had not been so strong in the house and kingdom as those who brought in the septennial bill pretended. This was A D 1689, and septennial parliaments were established A D 1716. It is hardly to be imagined that there should be more danger from Jacobitism in 1716 than in 1689, the very year after James's abdication. All this mews how flimzy the pretences are for what is big with so much evil. So Julius Caesarw's appointed by the senate and people of Rome, dictator for 6 months. He made himself perpetual dictator. All the world condemns this tyrannical proceeding. The house of commons, 2 George I was elected, as usual, for three years. They elected themselves for four years more, without leave of their constituents, given, or even asked! O! but the danger of a Jacobite parliament, if a new election was brought on! True. And in the same manner Caejar, in his civil war, tells us, he feared Pompey's tyranny; if he himself resigned the dictatorial power. Some authors tell us, the septennial act was made on purpose to save an odius ministry, who dreaded a new and incorrupt parliament. Thirty lords (even lords!) protested against the septennial act. And Mr. Snell told the house of commons, they might as well make themselves perpetual at once, as continue themselves one month beyond the time, for which they were elected.
  It was a singular modesty in the lords to originate in their house an act relating to the commons. Therefore lord Guernsey moved the commons, to throw it out of the house, without reading it. It was answered, That the triennial act had originated in the house of peers. [But if they were allowed to make a salutary proposal concerning what they had nothing to do with, it does not follow, that they are to be suffered to go out of their way to do mischief] Carried 276 to 156 for a second reading, the Tuesday after. Petitions were sent from many towns against it. And when this self-prolonged parliament (which, says the author of the Use and Abuse Of Parliament, went farther in impoverishing and enslaving their fellow-subjects, than all their predecessors from the restoration) came at last to be dissolved, the cities of London and Westminster, with bells, bonfires, illuminations, and every other demonstration of joy, celebrated its demise, as a deliverance from their worst enemies.
The motion for repealing the septennial act, A D 1742, was opposed by Pultney and Sandy (I suppose the patriots were afraid a new parliament might not be so staunch against Sir Robert.) Rejected, 204 against 84. The proposal was made by Sir John Barnard, which gives me a better opinion of him, than of Pultney and Sandy. 
  A D 1744, a motion was made for annual parliaments. Passed in the negative 145 to 113. Therefore 113 thought it right. Let not then the proposal of annual parliaments be thought romantic. 
  A motion was made, A D 1747, for leave to bring in a bill for shortening the term and duration of future parliaments: 'a measure truly patriotic, against which no substantial argument could be produced, although the motion was rejected by the majority, on the pretence that whilst the nation was engaged in such a dangerous and expensive war, it would be improper to think of introducing such an alteration in the form of government. This was setting common sense upon its head. The danger of the times is the very best reason for making salutary alterations, and abolishing dangerous abuses. 
Parliament was dissolved at the end of the 6th session, 1747 for a whimsical reason, according to some, viz because the Dutch were in doubt, whether Britain would persevere in her schemes, which were favourable to them, if the same parliament continued to fit. I should have thought the danger of a change of counsels was in case of a  change of parliament. Some said, as above observed, it was done to shorten the time, and lessen the mischiefs of electioneering. The king in his speech pretends that he dissolved the parliament to shew his intire confidence in the affections of his people, and that he did not depend merely on a particular set of men in the house of commons. Thus it appears that parliaments were originally renewed every year, and that a parliament and a session were the same thing. That they held on in this way with little variation, to the times of Henry VIII That annual parliaments were restored under Philip and Mary. That they were made triennial, A D 1640. That in the time of the troubles under Charles I they were very irregular, and protracted to an enormous length; the house of peers abolished, and the rump or remainder of the commons, kicked out by Cromwel. That under Charles II A D 1664, the triennial bill was repealed, and the period of parliaments left to the arbitrary pleasure of the prince. That his long or pensioned parliament met, A D 1661, and sat above 18 years. That the period of parliament was reduced back to triennial 6 William III AD 1694. And that, A D 1716, 2 George I they were protracted to, septennial, at which period they have continued ever since, in spite of innumerable remonstrances against a grievance so universally contested, and so notoriously mischievous. Of which more fully elsewhere.
SOME few nations have (hewn some small degree of apprehension from power continued in the same hands, knowing, that there can be no liberty, unless they, who make the laws, be well assured that they shall come, by and by, to be subject to their own laws.
  Aristotle mentions, as the chief cause of the subversion of free states, their deviating from the principles, on which they were originally constituted. He tells us, the Thurians had a salutary law, by which the same person could not be twice prætor without an intermission of five years. They suffered this law to be abrogated. Their state, from that fatal time, declined to its ruin.
The Athenians finding that their kings, trusting to the perpetuity of their power, began to stretch prerogative, abolished the regal office, and set up archons, who were to reign 10 years, and then to be subjects. But the people finding even this period [which is not much beyond that of our parliaments] too long, changed their plan of government, and appointed 9 archons, to reign one year. The Athenian epistates, the chief of the prytanes, was in office only one day, and never more than once. The 10 cosmi, or supreme magistrates of the Cretans, were annual. All the magistrates of the Ætslians were annual. The king and people of Epirus, during the age of their liberty, were accustomed to meet once in the year, the king to renew his coronation oath, and the people their allegiance. The Carthaginian suffetes, or chief magistrates, held their power only one year. Livy tells us, that the Carthaginians found two years, too long a period for their prætors to have power. They therefore made that office annual. The Corinthian prytanes were annual magistrates. 
  Three brothers having enjoyed the consulship seven years successivly, a regulation aas made, that neither consul nor tribune should be in office above one year. In England, a great family commands the elections of members for one or several boroughs, from generation to generation. The Romans never chose a dictator, but in extreme danger, and when expeditious measures alone could save the state, and only for six months. They appointed several times a dictator to drive an expiatory nail into the wall of Jupiter's temple. But he held his office only one day. The wise Romans would trust power no longer than was necessary. The authors of the Ant Univ Hist give the following account of the office of dictator among the Roman; `This supreme officer was called dictator, either because he was dictus, that is named by the consul, or from his dictating and commanding what should be done. No one could be created dictator till he had been consul. The time assigned for the duration of the office was the space of six months. As to the perpetual dictatorships of Sylla and Julius Casar, they were notorious usurpations, and violations of the laws of their country. The dictator was not allowed to march out of Italy, lest he should take advantage of the distance of the place to attempt something against the common liberty. He was always to march on foot, except in case of a tedious and sudden expedition, and then he formally asked leave of the people to ride. In all other things his power was absolute and uncontrouled. He might proclaim war, levy forces, lead them out, disband them, &c without consulting the senate. He could punish as he pleased; and from his judgment lay no appeal. To make his authority more aweful, he had always twenty-four fasces with axes carried before him, if we believe Plutarch, and Polybius. Livy ascribes the first rise of this custom to Sylla. The authority of all other magistrates ceased, or was subordinate to him. He had the naming of the general of the horse, who was wholly at his command. When his authority expired, he was not obliged to give an account of any thing he had done during his administration. [And we know accordingly what tyrants the dictators proved.] In short, the dictatorship was a kind of absolute monarchy, though not durable, and was looked upon as the only refuge of the Commonwealth in time of danger, till Sylla and Cæsar converting it into a tyranny, rendered the name of dictator odious, insomuch that, upon the fall of the latter, a decree passed in the senate, forbidding the use of that dignity upon any account whatsoever for the future.
The greater the power is, says Livy, the shorter ought to be the time of holding it. Nothing is more advantageous for a state, says Seneca, than that great power be short. When the Carthaginian judges were found to have made a bad use of their power, which was for life, Hannibal obtained a regulation, reducing it to annual.
The Romans, in their best times, jealous of those who assumed power, had almost condemned Marcius to death for assuming the title of proprætor given him by the army, but without authority of the senate, though he had just then gained a glorious victory in Spain.
  Cicero in his book, De Legib says, the following was an express law among the Romans, ' Eundem magiflratum, &c. Let no man bear the same office in the republic twice without an interval of 10 years between. It is true the people often broke through this wise regulation, and suffered power to be too often, and to continue too long, in the same person, or family, as in the case of Rutil Censorius created censor twice together, and of Fabius's son made consul, alter that authority had been often conferred on the father, so that he himself declared against the people's partiality for his family. The last Roman decemviri, though chosen by their country but for a year, prolonged their term by their own act, and retained the power they had usurped, till the people forced it out of their hands, and 'punished them severely for their usurpation. Their memory stands branded in history with all the infamy it deserves; while the names of Valerius and Horatius, under whose conduct the people recovered their right of electing annual magistrates, are celebrated by their historians with all the praises that gratitude can yield, or merit claim, monuments more lasting than brass or marble.
  Quinctius foresaw the bad consequences of suffering power to continue long in the same hands. Therefore he refused to be continued in the consulship beyond his year. In consequence of too long a continuance of power in the same hinds, Sylla and Marius attached to themselves the army in such a manner as grievously disturbed, and Caesar as ruined Rome. 
  Agustus, at the point of death, gave his will to his collegue in the consulship. And some supposed, he intended to restore the republican government. But recovering he went on as before, like presumptuous sinners, who escaping from illness, soon forget their sick-bed repentance.
  Observe the consequence of a contrary conduct. The Romans in their degenerate times became fearless of the loss of liberty. Though Sylla foretold, that Julius would be found to have many Mariuses within him; though Caesar openly bribed for the office of pontifex maximus, or chief priest, or, if you please, pope of Rome; though he defended Cataline the conspirator and his crew, (with whom he was accused of being an accomplice)till a band of equestrians drew their swords upon him, and had almost killed him; though he was accused of a conspiracy with Crassius, Sulla, and Autronius, to murder those senators, who opposed their ambitious views, and to seize the consulship for Crassius, and the command of the horse for himself; though he was accused of another plot with Pijo; though he behaved so ill in his prætorship, that the senators thought it necessary to take his office from him; though he refused to abdicate in obedience to the decree of the fathers, till he saw, that he would be driven from the bench by force; though he treated Bibulus, his collegue in the consulship, with such rudeness that he forced that meek spirited man to retire, after which he reigned alone as absolutely as any tyrant, imprisoning the best men of Rome, as Cato, and others, whenever they opposed his tyranny; though Julius, I say, thus gave innumerable proofs of that lawless ambition, which afterwards overthrew the liberties of his country, yet the too credulous people advanced this apparently dangerous citizen to the highest honours, and, giving him the province of Gaul for five years, and the command of the army, with their own hands put into his the sword with which he stabbed liberty to the heart. Even after the consul Marcellus faithfully warned the senate, that it was hazarding all that was valuable, to continue him. in his command; and that it was absolutely necessary for the public safety, that the formidable army should be disbanded; there were still Romans (degenerate Romans!) treacherous enough, and slavish enough, to support the man who, they knew, or ought to have known, was laying measures for subduing their country.
The people of Taprohane, supposed to be Ceylon in India, chose for their king a person who had no children, and if he happened to have children afterwards, they deposed him, lest the crown should be come hereditary, and power become inveterate in one family. The officer, who had in his custody the reals, and keys of the citadel and treasury, held his place but one day.
The antient brave and free Arragonians, justly fearing the encroachment of kingly power, appointed a magistrate called, in modern times, the justizia of Arragon, who was to come between the king and the people, and to whom the subjects might appeal, when injured by the king. This magistrate was to be the ablest lawyer in the country. And a king, who opposed his explanation of the sense of the law, was to be looked upon as a lawless tyrant. But about A D 1467, the justizia himself was found to have abused his power. The Arragonians therefore found it necessary to put his decisions under the examination of 17 men chosen out of the four orders of the kingdom. It may, I believe, be safely affirmed, that all the free states of antiquity, in their free times, made a point of giving no longer than annual authority to their magistrates.
The Florentines, offended at the long continuance of power in the Medici family, insisted that it was necessary 'to restore the constitution to its first principles, by restoring the magistrates to their regular functions in the government
  No president could be chosen at Florence in less than three years from his last service. By this means posts of honour were attainable by most of the citizens, and no man or party could become inveterate in power, and responsibility was still in view.
The Florentines ordered, about the beginning of the 16th century, that the office of gontalonier or chief magistrate should from that time be annual, and that the council should be enlarged by the addition of all who had gone through the great offices of state, either at home or abroad; the number before was but 18. Power should be widely diffused, and continually misting from hand to hand.
Cardinal Richelieu condemns the custom in France, of appointing the governnors of provinces tor life.
  At Venice the doge, not being an absolute sovereign, has not power to take off, or put on his ducal crown when he pleases. The consiglteri, or counsellors of Venice, are chosen for 8 months. The capi di quaranta, or heads of the courts of 40 judges, are chosen by the senate for two months. The savii del consiglio, or fages of the council, serve 3 months; the savii ie terra firma, or fages of the continent, 6 months. Five savii agli ordini, or fages of order, are likewise chosen by ballot in the senate for 6 months each.
The khalif Omar would not nominate his son for his successor, nor even suffer him to have a vote for the successor. It was enough, he said, for one family to have one in the important office of khalif.
  A doge of Lucca cannot be re-elected in less than 7 years. The senators are elected every two months. The great council of 130 nobles and 10 burghers hold their places 2 years. Their police is very attentive to the suppression of luxury.
When the throne of Poland becomes vacant, the primate archbishop of Gnesna, obtains a greater power than the king had; but this gives no jealousy, because he has no time, before a king be chosen, to make himself formidable. The Parmesans used to change their podesta twice a year. The directors of the Dutch Eastl-lndia company are obliged every third year, to give an account to the states general of their whole proceedings.
  A noble stand was made by the citizens of Dublin, for obtaining a limitation of the period of their parliaments. They have accordingly, in A D 1768, obtained a restriction of them to eight years, borne of the candidates they obliged to swear, that they would vote for this abridgment, before they elected them.
EVEN the English, who are described by a humorous author, as a people of great faith and little wit, that is, fore thought, have occasionally shewn some little fear of the mischief to be expected from power inveterating in the same hands.
The 24 barons, who were to redress grievances in the time of Henry III proved 24. tyrants; the consequence of trusting power in the hand s of a few. Accordingly the knights of the shires were obliged to curb the tyranny of the reforming barons.
Our ancestors were cautious of allowing power to remain too long even in the hands of searchers, gaugers, aulnegers [public measurers of manufactures,] customers [custom-house-officers] &c. 
  In the commission for the admiralty and navy, it was provided, that no chairman continue in office above a fortnight together, and all commanders to take their turns.
Even the king-killing parliament were sensible of the evil of too long parliaments. And their self-denying ordinance shews that the general opinion of those times was for a place-bill. And the same of adequate representation.
I Will throw together in this chapter some of the best arguments for short parliaments, that have occured to me in the course of my reading. I hope the reader will excuse any deficiencies he may find in the arrangement of them.
  To take the character of man from history, he is a creature capable of any thing the most infernally cruel and horrid, when actuated by interest, or what is more powerful than interest, passion, and not in immediate fear of punishment from his fellow creatures; for damnation lies out of sight. Who would trust such a mischievous monkey with superfluous power?
  The Jove of power is natural; it is insatiable; it is whetted, not cloyed, by possession. All men possessed of power may be expected to endeavour to prolong it beyond the due time, and to encrease it beyond the due bounds; neither of which can be attempted without danger to liberty. Therefore government (by such frail and imperfect creatures as men) is impossible without continual danger to liberty. Yet we find that men in all ages and nations have shewn an astonishing credulity in their faithless fellow-creatures; they have hoped against hope; they have believed against the sight of their own eyes.
Were any foreigner of good understanding to be asked, what he thought would, be the consequence of our commons being elected by so small a number of the people, and of their sitting for seven years, he would answer, that without a reformation of these irregularities, the British government must unavoidably run into an aristocracy, or tyranny of a few, the most odius of all forms of government. Yet the good people of England sleep very sound; and foreigners admire and envy our form of government. The truth is, that neither foreigners nor English consider much besides the theory of our constitution. They admire what it ought to be, and would be, if we had the true spirit of it, while they have reason to execrate it as it is in our times, and to look forward with horror on what it is like to end in. 
  It is justly observed by judge Blackstone, that the greatest superiority any man can obtain over another, is to make laws, by which he shall be bound. And surely the greater the power, the greater danger of its becoming inveterate in the same hands.
  A wise people will not suffer combinations of great families. The monopally of power is the most dangerous of all monopolies. An Athenian was banished by the ostracism, if 6000 citizens all of at least 60 years of age agreed, that it was necessary. Nor was it inflicted or suffered as a punishment, but was understood as a wise precaution, for the good of the whole, against the exorbitant popularity, and dangerous power of a few.
  No body is willing to part with power, and all are for increasing what they have. The prince of Orange (afterwards king William III) shews great anxiety about James IId's being limited.
Words of the act for declaring the rights of the subject at the beginning of the revolution. Frequent parliaments must mean frequent elections; for frequent meetings of parliament without new elections would he an evil, rather than an advantage. There are statutes three times in the reign of Edward III that parliament should be held once a year or oftener. To the same purpose, in the time of Rich II. Prorogations of parliament were then unkown. They began under Henry VI Little used till Hen VIII Will III was bsamed for so many officers in parliament. The king has power to chuse his officers and servants; but the servants and representatives of the people ought not to be the king's servants: who can serve too masters? If votes are purchased by places, and members are more than reimbursed their own shares of the public taxes, they become interested to load the people, in order to fill their own pockets. Accordingly let it be considered what a load might now be taken off from the people by annihilating, useless places and corrupt pensions.
A man may at onetime be sit for being a representative, who is not so at another. He may go into the house in independent circumstances. In three years, extravagance learned at London may beggar him. Were parliaments annual, the chance of this would be as I to 7. By a few mens monopolizing legislative power, 6 times the number 558, or 3,348 are in every parliament excluded from practically learning parliamentary knowledge, and understanding the interests of their country, besides their being excluded from what they have an equal natural right to, with the 558, who were chosen, ie who bought their seats.
Short parliaments would give the people an opportunity of knowing more of the state of things both at home and abroad, than long ones. 558 gentlemen do not know so much as seven times that number, or three times that number. Long parliaments are particularly favourable to corruption. A virtuous man could not be debauched in a year's sitting in St. Stephen's chapel. 
Length of parliaments destroys all responsibility, makes our delegates our masters, and erects them into an august assembly, whom we must not approach but in the humble guise of petition. Short parliaments would be clear of suspicion, and nothing would more promote confidence between king and people than freer from suspicion of court influence. If our kings are indifferent about the people's confidence, we are in the case of the people of France, whom the king can plunder at will. Can the people be free from suspicion, when they see some hundreds of placemen in the house? They must be a nation of ideots, if they were.
With what honest views can the court desire long parliaments? Parliamentary slavery is f\slower, but surer than quo warrantos, and the other oppressive acts of tyranny, which alarm the people and defeat themselves. So Cha II had almost ruined ail by his long pensioned parliament, whose very length qualified it for pensioning. All wise nations, and all good princes have approved of frequent meetings with their parliaments and diets. Our Edwards and Henries often put a stop to the course of their victories to meet parliament. The Spaniards were peculiarly cautious about the frequency of their state meetings. Their Sanchos, Henries, Ferdinands, and Charles's were very careful of this. Under Charles, who was particularly exact in this respect, the Spanish monarchy was mist flourishing. His son Philip pursued a contrary plan of encroachment on the people, and first eclipsed the glory of the monarchy. In France, under Clovis, Pepin, Charlemagne, Capet, and his successors for ages, the meetings of the slates were cherished. Lewis XI and most of his successors have promoted the contrary scheme of government, without the people. The consequences have been continual insurrections, tumults, and leagues. The subjects have often returned with interest on the heads of their ambitious princes, the damages they have suffered at their hands, which has reduced the kingdom to extreme distress. The struggles of the parliament of Paris, and people of France, during the minority of this present king, to recover their lost liberties, shew the precarious state of despotic monarchs. When Germany was exposed to unspeakable miseries from the Hungarians, Sclavonians, Vandals and Danes, the remedy was establishing frequent and annual diets by the golden bull, under Charles IV, wherein the imperial cities and Hanse towns took care to send new deputies to every new diet, lest they should be bribed by the imperial ministers. Holland, and Switzerland, though improveable in many points, are very careful on this head, and by the frequency of the assemblies of their states, have been secure.
  Harrington labours to shew, that all well-conducted states have avoided the error of suffering power to continue too long in the same hands. And he quotes Machiavel, who ascribes the ruin of the Roman commonwealth, to the want of an agrarian law, and the damage, which accrued from the prolongation of power in the same hands.
  The jacobites moved, A D 1693, for a place-bill, and short parliaments. And there were men, who, in the apostle Paul's time, preached Christ from contention. But truth is truth, if the Devil had spoke it, and Christianity is a good religion, though some have preached it from contention. So a place-bill, and short parliaments are salutary measures, though the jacobites proposed them from party-views. The former was passed by the commons, but rejected by the lords; the latter passed both houses, but was denied the royal assent. The lords threw out the bill for incapacitating placemen from sitting in the house, because it would seem too great a restraint on the people's liberty of choice. But this is a frivolous objection. For as the law stands now, the people are restrained from chusing persons unqualified as to fortune, and those who hold certain places; and all the evil is, that the people are not more restrained in their choice of improper persons.
  Therefore short parliaments are desirable. It is impossible, in many cases, to foresee what the effect and operation of an act of parliament will prove. And if a bad law must continue in force seven years (the same parliament will not perhaps like to repeal its own law) the subjects may be heavy sufferers.
The length of parliaments dejects the spirits of the few patriots who are still left. At the sitting down of a new parliament they lose all hope of redress, for many years. And the depression of their courage is the triumph of the court, and gives them opportunity for rivetting the chain.
  If our parliaments were annual, it might be as well, that our ministries, and the rest of the executive, were more permanent. For an honest parliament (and an annual parliament, with exclusion by rotation, could have no interest to be other than honest) would oblige the executive to act according to justice, and the public interest, which would secure the public safety. The reducing our parliaments to independency on the court, would confound the enemies of this country. For it would shew the world, that the court had no indirect designs. And no nation can hope to injure Britain, if her government is true to her.
  Walpole, A D 1735. when the house was moved about shortening parliaments said, It would be dangerous; for that it would make the government democratical by giving factious men too much game to play. This was truly Walpolian, that is Jesuitical, reasoning. In whose hands ought the power to be? In those of a corrupt court? will it be safer there than in the hands of the original proprietors, I mean the people? Is the court likely to consult the people's interest with more diligence and fidelity than the people themselves? The court may be rich, though the nation be ruined. But if the nation be ruined, what is to become of the people?
The unembarrassed modesty of a thorough-paced courtier sticks at nothing. Pelham formally sets himself to prove (in opposition to the sense of all that ever thought, spoke, or wrote upon government) that But wise founders of states have generally thought prevention preferable to punishment; and have, therefore, made regulations for preventing the-continuance of power too long in the same hands. And in spite of their utmost precaution, wicked ministers have often escaped.
  It is observed, that the members are particularly careful of their conduct toward the end of a parliament, with a view to their being re-elected. Does not this shew the advantage of short parliaments, and the frequent return of power into the hands of the people? If it be said, upon the plan of exclusion by rotation, and an effectual place-bill, gentlemen would not want to be re-elected, and therefore the shortening of parliaments would not make them at all the more careful of their conduct; this is confessing all that is wanted, vi<<. That, if parliaments were upon a right foot, there would be no byass upon the minds of the members, to draw them away from their country's interest; which they would naturally pursue, because their own is involved in it.
The place-bill has been repeatedly passed by the commons in consideration of an approaching general election, which shews plainly the advantage of short parliaments.
  A .motion was made, A D 1713, to address the queen that she would desire the duke of Lorrain to remove the pretender out of his dominions. Sir William Whitlocke observed, that there was such an address presented to Cromwel about the removing of Charles Stuart out of France, who was afterwards restored to the throne. Being near the end of a parliament, and the members fearing for their election, it was resolved nem con. This shews the advantage of short parliaments. For the jacobite interest was at that time thought to be strong in the house.
Many writers lay great stress upon I know not what imaginary danger from unbalancing the power of the three estates. For my part, 1I own I am so dull, that I can see but one danger respecting the interior of the kingdom, viz. The danger of the peoples being enslaved by the servants of the crown. Suppose the power of king and lords diminished to what degree the reader pleases; if the people of property in general were free and happy, could the king and lords be unhappy? Would the king and the lords have just reason to complain, if they were happy? Does any friend to his fellow-creatures wish the king and lords to possess power for any other purpose, than the general happiness? Can we not imagine a state, in which the people might be very happy, in which king and lords possessed much less power than they do in this country? Can we not imagine a very happy state, in which there was neither king nor lords? What is the necessity of a check on the power of the commons by king and lords? Is there any fear, that the commons be loo free to consult the general good? Must the representatives of the people be checked and clogged in promoting the interest of their constituents? If there be not some necessity for this (which to me seems as rational as to say, there ought to be a check to prevent individuals from being too healthy, or too virtuous)! Cannot see the solidity of that reasoning, which lays so much stress on the necessity of a balance, or equality of power among the three estates, or indeed (speculatively, or theoretically speaking) of a necessity of any more estates than one, viz An adequate representation of the people, unchecked and uninfluenced by any thing, but the common interest; and that they appoint responsible men for the execution of the li ws made by them with the general approbation. Yet some writers of no small note effect to regret the supposed weakness of the crown and house of lords, when set against the commons, because the latter commands the purse.  The king's legislative power,' says my esteemed friend Mr. Hume', is no check to that of the commons.' And why, I pray you, should it be a check? Again, Though the king has a negative in the palling of laws, yet this, in fact, is esteemed of so little moment, that whatever is voted by the, two houses is sure to be passed into a law, and the royal assent is little better than a mere form. What would this gentleman have; Ought a king, a single individual, or a handful of lords, to have the power of stopping the business of the whole British empire according to their caprice, or their interested views, whose interest may often be imagined (by themselves at least) to lie very wide of the general weal? I can see very clearly the use of a check upon the power of a king or lords; but I own I have no conception of the advantage of a check upon the power of the people, or their incorrupt and unbyassed representatives. The same eminent writer seems to think a certain competent degree of court-influence, by offices, necessary. For my part, I look upon every degree, great or small, of ministerial power in parliament as a deadly poison in the vitals of the constitution, which must bring on its destruction.
The opposers of annual parliaments say, Every thing will be fluctuating under them, and no nation will treat with you; no war can be prosecuted with success, &c. Have they then forgot, that the treaties of Bretigny and Troyes were concluded, and the victories of Crecy and Agincourt gained, under the auspices of annual parliaments? 
  A standing parliament, or the same parliament long continued, changes the very nature of our constitution in the fundamental article, on which the prefervation of our whole liberty depends. The security of our liberty does not consist only in frequent sessions of parliament, but in frequent w parliaments c.
  Charles II governed, by his long or pensioned parliament in much the same arbitrary manner as William the Bastard did without a parliament. 
The act, A D 1641, for securing parliament against dissolution by the king, without its own consent, was dangerous, as it left parliament at liberty to sit as long as they pleased. But it was thought safe, because there was then no considerable number of places, pensions, or contracts, and the people had therefore an unreserved confidence in parliament. It set, however, a very bad example for corrupt times. The people thought it a glorious victory over the tyrant, the only object of their fear; little apprehending, that ever a time would come, when they should have reason to dread an excessive power in parliaments. Yet they ought to have known, that it is never safe that power be so far out of the peoples reach, that they cannot resume it, whenever they see it abused, either by kings, or parliaments. And they ought to have remembered, that (such is the disposition of the human mind) to give independent power to any set of men whatever, is giving them the watch-word to erect themselves into tyrants. The proceedings of that very parliament exhibited a striking proof of the justness of this remark, and the independency on their constituents, still arrogated by many of our members of parliament, confirms it. Were our parliaments annual, we should see our members as ready to acknowledge their responsibility to their constituents, as now our overseers of the poor are to submit their accounts to the examination of the parish.
To these observations of the good bishop, I will add, That it is at no time easy to say what effect a partial reformation of abuses will produce. And the mere reducing of parliaments to triennial is surely a very partial correction. It is only stopping one leak in ten. For supposing parliaments were triennial, so long as a few thousands (instead of many hundred thousands) have the power of sending in a majority of the house, it will be in the power of the treasury to influence elections. And, so long as there is no penalty for fitting in the house of commons, and, at the same time, enjoying a place, or pension, so long there will be danger lest the votes of the members be influenced by a corrupt court. And so long as the same individuals may be returned again and again, without necessity of exclusion by rotation, so long it will be worth the ministry's while to influence them, and worth their while to bribe their electors. But, if parliaments were annual, with exclusion by rotation; if the power of electing were equally distributed, as it ought to be, among men of property, so that no one member could be elected by fewer than a majority of 800 votes; and if no member could hold a place, or pension, while he sat in the house of commons, under a severe penalty -- if all these restorations of the constitution were brought about, I will engage, that court-influence in parliament shall be impossible-, and then we (hall see the golden days mentioned by the bishop.
Concerning triennial parliaments it was argued A D 1693, That long parliaments might prove dangerous either to king or people; to the former by their obtaining great influence among the people, and retrenching too much the power of the crown. But this I think frivolous, because history has no example of a crown, whose power was too much retrenched. And besides it is most likely that a short parliament will retrench prerogative. That long parliaments may be likely to prove dangerous to the people, is extremely natural. For power becoming inveterate in the hands of any set of men is always dangerous. When a court knows, that the same set of men are likely to be in parliament for even, fourteen, or twenty one years, it becomes worth while to practise upon them; and a wicked court may influence a corrupt parliament to give up.
But surely we cannot do much, if we cannot get over such frivolous objections as these. As to the pride and insolence, which the power of frequent elections would produce in the freeholders, it is nothing to the purpose. We are not to deprive the freeholders of what is otherwise their just right, because their possessing of it may make them proud. On that principle, they must not have their estates, at least none must have considerable estates. And, above all, we must have no bishops, peers, or kings. And as to faction's being likely to be increased by shortening parliaments, it is more likely to confound faction. The very support of faction is power continued long in the same hands. And as to the increase of expence to members in consequence of short parliaments, it is an objection set upon its head. For, if parliaments were annual, with exclusion of two thirds for three years by rotation, there would be at once an end put to packing, bribing, canvassing, electioneering, placing, and pensioning of parliament men; because the parliament, never consisting wholly of the same men for two years together, it would not be worth while for the court to get their iniquitous schemes carried in parliament, only to remain for one year, and be overthrown the next i and whenever a seat in the house came to be no longer a matter of emolument, the contest would be (as now with respect to parish-officers in England, Vol I  and seats in the assemblies in America) how to avoid being elected.
  The people's right of annually electing deputies to represent them in parliament was, at the time of the triennial act, as much a part of their birthright, as the freedom of their persons. They had enjoyed it longer than Magna Charta, without violation, till the times of Charles I It was therefore no more in the power of any single king and parliament to deprive the people of this right, than of Magna Charta. And the people have now a right, at any time, to resume their original power, and to elect only for one year, declaring, that they will not yield obedience to one act made in a second year of the same parliament.
The only plausible pretence for septennial parliaments, viz the danger of a jacobite parliament's being chosen, never was solid; because, on that principle, parliaments should have been still longer than septennial, that is, there should have been no new parliament called, while there was a considerable body of jacobites in the nation. But if the pretence for septennial parliaments had been ever so plausible, at the time of that fatal innovation, in the name of common sense, what has that to do with our times?
  It was proposed to address for frequent new parliaments, A D 1675, in the house of peers. It was urged that parliaments both before and long after the conquest, were held 3 times a year, viz at Easter, Whitsuntide, and Christmas, 8 days, each time. This continued with some variations till Edward III Then parliaments were appointed to be annual, or oftener, if need be, and prorogations were not then, nor till late times, unknown. It was unreasonable, that the same man should engross legislative power, and exclude so many others equally entitiled. Change of hands was useful to keep those intrusted to their duty. A member may be chosen when in good circumstances. He may ruin himself with gaming, &c. Then he becomes obnoxious to bribery. Then he taxes the people, to enable the court to bribe him, and the rest of the venal crew. At any rate a place-man is not as free as he who has nothing from the court. Honores mutant mores. The commons are now become judges of their own privileges, condemning and imprisoning their fellow subjects' [their constituents, their masters]  at pleasure, and without oath; they are judges of all elections, by which means very often they, and not the people, chuse their fellow members. This is owing to the length of parliaments. Long parliaments give time for settling cabals and schemes of corruption. The nation was therefore much obliged to the long pensioned parliament for not enslaving it; How easily this may be done in future ages; under such princes and long parliaments, may easily be conjectured. Lately there have been given 1500/. 2000/. and 7000/. to be elected. There is a scurvy proverb, That men, who buy dear, cannot live by selling cheap. The address was however carried in the negative. Several lords protested, and the king came to prorogue the house before all the lords who intended to join in the pro-~ test, were come to the house.
He then goes on to shew, that, as members are delegated by electors, to supply their places, and do their business for them, they ought not to be continued longer than a year; because circumstances may so change in a year, that a member who was fit for the business in agitation, when he was chosen, may be found very ill qualified for judging of what comes before parliament, the following sessions; yet the electors have no opportunity of changing h>m for a more proper deputy. Again he shews, that the continuing the same members for several years, is overthrowing the people's privilege of delegation, and giving their delegates a power of becoming their masters, and the creatures of the courts from which, and not the people, they receive their commissions upon every new prorogation. If short parliaments be the most effectual means for preventing bribery, short parliaments are eminently desireable; for bribery is more dangerous than quo warrantos. He then goes on to shew, that frequent new parliaments were the custom under our Henries and Edwards. That the best kings of Spain, and of France, and the best German emperors were most desirous of frequent meetings with their people in their general cortes, parliaments, and diets. 

