                           Apr 27 CASSANDRA TO CATO
I have engaged in the present political controversy with a design to be of service to my country. On an impartial inquiry into the present state of the British Constitution, it appears to me that it is out of the power of the British Legislature to give us security for the future enjoyment of our rights and liberties; and on this ground I have opposed a reunion. I have examined everything advanced by you on the subject, and find them wide of the mark. The point with me has ever been, what will secure our liberties? The question of interest is ever determined thereby. National prosperity and national happiness are incompatible with national slavery. It is of small consequence to America, whether God has granted a King to the People of Britain or not, or whether the Constitution of their Government answers excellently to the inhabitants of that Island, if dependance on that excellent form of Government is big with slavery and ruin to America.
If you mean not to hold your countrymen in suspense until the day of salvation is past, I call upon you to prove that Great Britain can offer any plan of constitutional dependance which will not leave the future enjoyment of our liberties to hope, hazard, and uncertainty, as the Forester has finely expressed it; and that if she can, there is a probability she will. If the one is impossible, or the other altogether improbable, yourself must acknowledge it is time to part.
By the Constitution of Great Britain, the present Parliament can make no law which shall bind any future one. For as the author of Lex Parliamentaria, or Law of Parliament, observes, page 77, when treating of the power and authority of Parliaments. Therefore should any Parliament give up, renounce, and forever quit claim to the right of making laws to bind us in any case whatever, yet it can constitutionally stipulate for no longer than that one sitting. They have as full power and authority to revive and enforce the claim at their next sitting as if such renunciation had never taken place. Is it wisdom, then, or is there safety in entering upon terms of accommodation with a power which cannot stipulate for the performance of its engagements? If we are foolish enough to do this, must not our future security depend entirely on the will of a British Parliament, i. e. of a British Ministry? This, in my opinion, must form an insuperable obstacle to reconciliation in the mind of every honest man and sincere lover of liberty on the Continent.
A second reason against reconciliation is, that the British Constitution is so effectually undermined by the influence of the Crown, that the People of Britain have no security for the enjoyment of their own liberties, and therefore America can never be safe in being dependant on such a State.
The author of "An Historical Essay on the English Constitution," printed Anno 1771, says: "I shall not hesitate to date the decline of our Constitution from the Revolution. William the Third and his Parliament began the practice of restraining the elective power of the People, by the Legislative authority  --  a power that might become ten thousand times more dangerous to the elective rights of the People than the Crown could ever possibly be. For whenever the active parts of a Government, founded upon the common rights of mankind; shall usurp a power to restrain or destroy those rights from whence they derive their authority, that State is not far from destruction.
To my quotations from this Invaluable essay, I beg leave to add the following, as perfectly applicable to America; and the foregoing extracts will not only justify, but enforce the doctrine it contains, to every honest heart:
A Constitution that affords no check against its own servants can yield no security to us.
He who has the nomination of the Officers of Government has the whole power of that Government in his own hand, and may do with it as he pleases. This is abundantly proved by the present ruinous state of Government in every Colony, where the King or a Proprietor had the nomination. Liberty will never flourish in such a Government. How different from, and how much superior to our present form of Government, was the Saxon, or old Constitution of England.
These three considerations form, in my opinion, an insurmountable obstacle against a reunion with Great Britain. The man who has not thought upon these points is ill qualified to judge of the necessity of Independence, or the inevitable ruin attendant on reunion.
My objections are radical, reaching to the root of the evil; and if a radical cure cannot be obtained in one way, it ought to be obtained in another. To skin over the wound would be madness. I therefore once more entreat you either to point out a complete remedy for these defects, and prove it more easily attainable than a complete delivery by a Declaration of Independence, or to give no further opposition to the measure. He who cannot see a fair prospect of removing these defects, and yet wishes to seeAmerica return to a state of dependance, has something else in view than the liberties of his country.
CASSANDRA.
N. B. No good man can agree to any terms which will not give perfect security; and a division must therefore be intended by every man who attempts to prepare the minds of the ignorant and unwary to accept of anything else. As every writer on the side of dependance has hitherto studiously evaded the point, it appears they design, if possible, to effect a division. Take care, then, ye good People of America, not to be duped by distinguished Tories.

