I was in a flutter to a certain degree that the thoughts of setting out for London, for which I have always had an enthusiastic fondness. I was at the same time seriously concerned at parting with my wife. Everything depends upon our ideas; and I could with truth describe what passed in my mind this day in such a manner as to furnish out a narrative like that of the Londoner in the idler who gives a dreadful detail of the disasters which befell him on a jaunt into the country, such as rain falling upon him from the heavens and many other circumstances. My parting with my wife this day would make just such a figure should I describe it as I really felt it; for to part with a valuable friend and constant companion and go 400 miles from her, though but for two months, is something considerable to a domestic man who has any turn to anxiety of mind.
I said at about four o'clock in the afternoon. Mr. William Wilson, writer to the Signet, was my traveling companion. He gave me my first fee, which has made me ever since look upon him with particular regard. He has indeed given me a great many more fees, which has served to keep alive the first impression made upon my  -  hand, which, as a lawyer, is equivalent to making an impression on my heart. He will be 62 the 25 of April next but has nothing of an old man about him except experience being healthy and cheerful the most laborious in his profession. We had along with us another chaise Mr. home the coachmaker's son and a son of Mr. Callender of Craigforth's. The first, being bred to his father's business, was going to London for his improvement. The latter, a fine smart little fellow about 17 who had already been three years in America, was going out to the East Indies. The country was deeply covered with snow, and we were told we could not take the Blackshiels road; so we went by Haddington. We got to Dunbar at night. The house was dirty and confused. We were served by alas who was both ugly and stupid. When Mr. Wilson asked if she could get him some oatmeal porridge, she answered, "some oatmeal punch?" Had one of your Englishmen, well-prepared to form strange notions of Scotland, heard this, it would have been enough for him to represent us as so devoted to oatmeal that we make are very punch with it.
We went on very well, considering the deep roads. We resolved never to dine but only to take some cold meet at midday, which we did very heartily. We got it night to Alnwick.
Mr. Wilson I studied law papers sometimes during this our journey, and sometimes sang. It was curious to hear him sing the songs in the beggar's Opera. He had a various reading of the line, "and turns our lead to gold." He sang: "and turns all our lead to gold," believing it to be the genuine text; and he insisted very strongly on the Justice of the preference given to the high women's fire over that of the chemist, in this view: because the chemist fire turns only a small proportion to gold. I gave him my explanation of the line which is by no means clear in its meaning to most people and may perhaps be mistaken by me. The line I mean is, "as men should serve a cucumber." It refers the expression in the next line: "she flings herself away." Now the question is, why should men fling away a cucumber? My explanation is this. It is a common saying, "as cool as a cucumber," so that a cucumber is a cooling thing. Now Mrs. Peachum who sings the song was a woman of that genius that did not like men to be cool but on the contrary; and therefore she would have them fling away such frigorific stuff. We got at night to Darlington. I stopped about a quarter of an hour with my brother at Newcastle; and we were stopped a while by voting the river. It was terrible to see the ruins of the bridge.
Nothing material happens. We got at night to Doncaster. (I should have observed that I paid a visit at Morpeth to Mrs. Collingwood, a widow lady, mother to a gentleman of a good estate in the neighbourhood, and enter my friend Temple's wife. I always pay her that complement, unless when I pass through Morpeth in the night-time. She takes a very kind. Upon this occasion she said I showed her "such unparalleled attention.")
I this day paid a visit at Grantham to the Reverend Mr. Palmer, a clergyman who has a good living there. He was chaplain to see John Cust when Speaker of the House of Commons. He carried me upstairs to an elegant room ornamented with some fine prints, and as it was a beautiful forenoon, the sun shone brightly upon them. But I saw what I had never seen before: his spouse, a comely VanDyke figure, and his daughter, one of the loveliest figures I ever beheld. I cannot help being instantaneously affected by the sight of beauty. Mr. Palmer is a man of learning and worth, hospitable and decently social. He has a jolly appearance, not plump and sleek, but a fair well-kept skin, easy and happy. My being accustomed to the bar has made me callous to the most attentive looks of the ablest men. But a glance from a fine I can yet affect my assurance. I felt this today. I compare myself to one of those animals who by their strong scales are tough skins are invulnerable by a bullet but maybe wounded by the sharp point of a sword, which can pierce between the scales or hit some weak point of the skin. 
We got it night to Doncaster. The English inns are indeed most admirable; and whenever a man has been some time without seeing them, he must be agreeably struck.
Nothing worth recording was either said or done. But I shall here put down a simile which I made at Alnwick on Sunday night. Mr. Wilson was observing what an advantage it was to a lawyer to have such practice. "Ay," said I, "he never knows law well till he has had its connected in his mind with fax, particular causes. They are two principles of law likes sticks to keys in a garden. Principles will lies sluggish in the mind by themselves. They will not rise vigorous unless supported by real causes." This is a good idea; and upon some occasion when my imagination is warmer and my expression more fluent I might expand it. It is a bug which would have an excellent appearance if fully and beautifully blown. We got at night to Buckden.
We  breakfasted at Stevenage, where we shaved and dressed. Wilson, R Barber there, had married a woman of Welwyn in Hertfordshire, six miles from this place, so knew or pretended to know the celebrated Dr. Young. He gave us a strange account of him. He said his son had somehow offended him, and the doctor would never be reconciled to him and what not so much as see him when on death-bed; that he put everything past him that he could; but that the son succeeded him in a pretty estate and then married the daughter of a clergyman in whose house he had lived and been supported during his father's displeasure. This implacability was not improbable in the dark and forcible spirit of the author of night thoughts. But our barber gave us a more extraordinary anecdote. He said the doctor kept a mistress, a likely woman who lived with him till he died; that he left this woman all he could, and that their connexion was well known. I think it is Ranger who says," your grave men are always the greatest whoremasters." The observation may be true. But Dr. Young was much more than a grave man; he was gloomy, a melancholy, a miserable man; a man to whom all nature appeared under the darkest shade, a man of the deepest theology and most sublime ideas of Futurity. That such a man should keep the mistress seems hardly credible. Our barber however was very confident in his assertion. I humoured the fellow, and when a very pretty made came into the room, "that," said I, "we do for Dr. Young." I have for some time thought of writing an essay on the genius and writings of Dr. Young it seems his son now lives at Welwyn. I may contrive to get some authentic information with regard to his private life.
The snow was now very thin and we found ourselves in a milder and more benign climate. I look back on former parts of my life, and my present firmness and cheerfulness of mind had full value by comparison with the weakness and gloominess which I recollected. The very driving in the post-chaise was a considerable pleasure. We arrived in London about five o'clock, having just taken about five days to the journey, and indeed he cannot be performed in less with comfort; that is to say, taking a moderate degree of the refreshments of eating, drinking, and sleeping, which one ought surely to do unless when some necessity obliges to hurry. There was a thick fog over London today, so that I did not get the view of it from Highgate Hill which used to elate me so highly. We stopped at the lemon tree inn at the top of the Haymarket, a true Scots house, where Colin Donaldson lived many years and made much money. He gave up business some time ago and was succeeded by one Armstrong, who was just dead; so the house was in the state of the viduity. It was as dirty and confused as any Scots in can be, the one the middle of London. As it was the first house I was in when I came first to London, there was a certain curious pleasure in finding myself in it again.
We eat a beef steak and drank a glass of port and then every man went to his proper destination. General Paoli had invited me to come and lodge at his house, and I indeed reckoned upon being there. I immediately went to his house in Albemarle Street. I asked a chairman which was General Paoli's house. So little is the great Paoli known by some. I immediately after this dialogue perceived Giuseppe, the general's little Corsican servant, just before me. I called; he came running up and sees me by the hand, then hurried along to his master's.
Paoli embraced me with all welcome. Count Gentili was with him, a Corsican count long in the Austrian service, you gave up his commission to go home and fight along with his countrymen, and then accompanied the general to England. The count is a thin creature with a sharp hooked nose and a voice like a fugie cock, like the crow screaming when pursued by a hawk. He was very happy to meet me again, but was rather a little troublesome, for it seems he had lodged eighteen months with two Ms. Carnegies from Scotland settled in London and was very keen to speak Scots; and indeed he had made a good proficiency in it, though I had no pleasure in hearing him cry, "would you sit into the fire?" And then he told that when the King asked the Duchess of Gordon how she liked London, she said, "it's frizzle  -  frizzling in aw the morning and knock  -  knocking aw the neght." This was natural enough for Jeanie Maxwell. But the count's figure in sharp key of speaking and a broadness high German could not but discussed me. There was also here Signor Martinelli, and Italian letterato, an old man. He has written a history of England which the general priest. There was lying on one of the tables in the room a fine addition of Boccaccio, published by him with notes, at London, some years ago. He said he had lost Pound400 sterling by it. I took this to be excessive exaggeration, to which such foreigners are much given. I was glad he had no proposals to offer. In a little came in a Corsican Abbe, the Abbate ___. He had been of the party for the Genoese; but having gone to Venice and studied, his mind opened that he became a zealous patriot. The conversation was over political and literary kind; but as I had not yet recovered a readiness at following people speaking Italian, I made little of it.
When I made a motion to go away and told the general that I had not fixed my lodgings, he asked me to take a room in his house; but I could see that he did not think he had one sufficiently good, and besides that, count gentili was now lysed with him, it would not be convenient that I should be with him to. I considered also that my being lives there might give the grub-Street writers an opportunity of throwing out low abuse, and saying that he was pensioned a British generosity and kept the Scotsman gratis in his house. I therefore beg leave to decline accepting his invitation but said I should take lodgings near him. I then took my leave for that night and got into the street in a disagreeable uncertainty where I should sleep. I did not know but Mr. Dilly's house might be full; and it was at a great distance from me now. I had no small repugnance at the thought of sleeping at the lemon-tree, but imagine I might be obliged to land there. As I walked up the strand and passed through a variety of fine girls, genteelly dressed, all wearing Venus's girdle, all inviting me to amorous intercourse, I confess I was a good deal uneasy. My ideas nationally run into their old channels, which were pretty deeply worn, and I was indulging speculations about polygamy and the concubines of the patriarchs and the harmlessness of temporary likings unconnected with mental attachment. I was really in a disagreeable state and yet would not free myself from it by taking a coach. I resolved never again to come to London without bringing my wife along with me.
I called and sat a few minutes with Mr. William Wilson, who had taken up his quarters at a friend's house, Mr. Murray's, bookseller in Fleet Street. I then called in Johnson's court for my revered friend, Mr. Samuel Johnson. But he was at Mr. Thrale's in the borough, and was not to be home till next day; and Mrs. Williams was out upon a visit. I proceeded to the poultry to Mr. Dilly's. Mr. Charles was at home and gave me a hearty welcome. I was pleased to find Mrs. Judd the housekeeper and James the servant both there. Mr. Charles was full of the history of Bolland, the Sheriff's officer who had been hanged the day before at Tyburn, and our conversation was quite the London style  -  the city style. We sat down to a cold foul and ham and tarts, and I also got a basin of excellent soup and felt myself quite comfortable. In a little in came my friend Mr. Edward Dilly, as lively, as quick-speaking, and as cordial as ever, and much happiness did he show on seeing me. Along with him was Mrs. Knowles, famous for needlework. She did ahead of the King for which the Queen made her a present of Pound800, but said her work was invaluable. Her husband was an apothecary; but upon his wife's getting thus a kind of interest at court, bethought himself of commencing physician and is now actually studying at Edinburg in order to take his degrees. She was formerly a distinguished beauty and still looked very well, and was a clever agreeable woman. Mr. Dilly insisted on my lodging there. He wanted to have me altogether, but at any rate insisted I should stay that night, and whenever I was late in the city end of the town, should always come to my room there and consider it as my home. I felt myself truly well, and only regretted that my dearest companion was not with me.
While we were sitting at breakfast, Inc. a my old friend Captain Hoggan, one who under his external appearance of being very delicate and even a little foppish is a man of steady and generous friendship and has uncommon prudence and knowledge in the common affairs of life. He kindly offered to assist me in getting lodgings; very luckily the Capt. Boothby of his regiment, an acquaintance of ours, had that very morning left very good lodgings at Mr. King's, Glover, corner of conduit Street. We drove immediately in Hackney-coach to look at them, and they please me much; and not the less so that they were only a guinea a week, which, for a first-floor in the centrical part of the town, is very reasonable. Laird Heron occupied them last year. I therefore without hesitation hired them, and was glad to be fixed in the home at once, without having any time to pass in a disagreeable state of doubt, like a bachelor who was determined to marry but knows not on whom to fix. Lodgings are still more difficult to choose than wives; because it does not often happen that a man could seize up to kill her affection for one lodging more than another chilly has lived a while in one it takes a kind of regard for it from habit.
Then I went and called for the Duke of Queensberry. Old Quan, the Porter, shook me by the hand and most cordially ushered me in. The Duke received me very civilly, and we had some conversation on the common topics of the times, when in came Capt. Douglas of Kelhead. After sitting a while, he and I went in cold for Douglas, but he was not at home. I found David Kennedy at home and had a laugh with him.
I found it would be very tedious and idols to put down every visit which I made, so I shall mark only what is of some consequence and not tell that I called the doors and did not find people at home. My views in coming to London this spring were: to refresh my mind by the variety in spirit of the metropolis, the conversation of my revered friend Mr. Samuel Johnson and that of other men of genius and learning; to try if I could get something for myself, or be of service to any of my friends by means of the Duke of Queensberry, Lord Mountstuart, or Douglas, all of whom had given me reason to expect their assistance; to be employed in Scotch appeals in the House of Lords, and also see how the land my life for me at the English bar; and to endeavor to get my brother David well-settled as a merchant in London. There is business enough.
I dying this day with general paoli. Brompton the painter was there. He seemed to be a genteel, sensible man, and spoke Italian remarkably well. Our conversation was just on ordinary topics. In the afternoon I called my friend Sir Alexander McDonald and found him and my beautiful cousin, my lady, sitting by themselves in a very tolerable house in Cavendish Square, not magnificent but very well. They were in great spirits at seeing me. I should have mentioned that I met his brother Archie and the forenoon and walked with him to his chambers in Lincoln's Inn, and was told by him that Sir Alexander was thinking to stand for member of Parliament for the Shire of Inverness. I also should have mentioned that I called up my old friend Mr. love's Of Drury Lane Theatre, whom I found very ill of the severe cough and looking as ill as ever he had pretended to doing any character upon the stage. I promise to see him sometimes. Sir Alexander McDonald and I are always very when we meet and always get into the humour of planning and playing upon words, which I cannot help thinking very good amusement. Lady McDonald said she was just going abroad to visit a lady who was lying in, and who was a great wit. "Ay," said I, "it seems she is a lady of a pregnant genius." The Knight and I when in his coaching called for my kinsman Mr. Bosville and for Mr. Dempster, but found neither. He went to her rout; and I strolled about a while and then went home.
The maid of the house was a pretty little black-eyed girl, and I was informed (as a secret) by Hoggan that Captain Boothby had found her to be very complaisant. This with rather a bad circumstance for me. Before I went to bed the gipsy came, and with a sweet English voice asked, "do you want anything more tonight, sir?"
Capt. Hoggan breakfasted with me. Joseph, my servant, whom I had left at Newcastle to come by sea if the wind was fair, and if not, by the fly, had arrived last night, but having forgotten the street where general Paoli lives, did not find me out till this morning. I was glad to see him; for I found myself not at my ease without him.
I went to Johnson's court, Fleet Street, and was happy enough to find Mr. Johnson at home. Frank, his black, who had left him for some years, was returned to him, and showed me up to his study. Frank and I were pleased to renew our old acquaintance. I waited a little and then heard the great man coming upstairs. The sound of his feet upon the timber steps was weighty and well announced his approach. He had an old purple cloth suit and a large whitish wig. He embraced me with a robust sincerity of friendship. 
By this time his levee was attended by the Reverend Mr. Stockdale, a strange mortal born at Berwick-upon-Tweed and in acquaintance of my worthy friend temple's, by whose recommendation I had him once to breakfast with me as I passed through Berwick. He was once an officer in the Army; then turned clergyman; Ben was guilty of irregularities, left an old woman whom he had married for money, and ran away to France with a young lady. The old woman having died, he came to London, married the young lady, commenced translator and author, and is now curate at Ludgate and chaplain to the Fleet prison. He is a profound admirer of Mr. Johnson's, who was very good to him. The other attendant on the levee this morning was of Mrs. Desmoulins, the wife of a writing-master, who seem to be an old acquaintance of Mr. Johnson's, having been intimate with his wife. Stockdale and she did not much interrupt our conversation.
I said I thought there was a glory and thanks, a fine young fellow of Pound5000 a year, going out on so dangerous expedition from a thirst of knowledge. Stockdale contested this and said it was no more in banks than a gratification of his particular passion instead of going to newmarket or the like; that he thought it would be much more glorious for him to stay at home and employee his fortune in relieving indigent merit in doing good to numbers. That he thought a man's going on a dangerous expedition in order to make himself independent rather than lounge at home was glorious. Mrs. Desmoulins said she could not see how it was glorious in Amman to do what he was driven to buy necessity. I said, "I indeed cannot see that if the one is not glorious, the other should be its. There is surely no glory in a man's going out on expedition to get his dinner. I know not but Mr. Banks may have been partly actuated by public spirit. At any rate I think it is glorious for a young man of great fortune to have so noble a passion instead of those mean passions by which most of them are actuated."
We talked of Dr. Hawkesworth's being employed in writing an account of the expedition which Mr. Banks and Mr. Solander have already made, and that he would do it well.
When Mr. Johnson returned to us I told him we had been disputing whether banks or Solander could be allowed to have glory from their expedition. 
I breakfasted with Dempster, whom I found as agreeable as friendly as ever, improved much in speaking English, and appearing to be as happy as I could wish them. Parliament in the East India Company had accustomed him to manly employment, and I could see that he was really satisfied with the situation. He is conscious of acting with honour and fidelity and spirit, and he feels himself happy and having a share in the great deliberations both as to this nation and the Empire in India. He said he would not give up the enjoyment of the two sessions which he had sat in Parliament for any consideration. I gave him some account of his old friends in Scotland. He said he thought with a pleasing regret of our parties with the ladies of Kellie in which we were so happy. He said some good things, which go down into my Boswelliana. Dempster said it would be the greatest treasure of this age. Indeed he will contain a rich collection of good things. I said I should have riders to go about and pick up good things for me, or have correspondence established in all the country towns. He kept out all company till we had taken a hearty draught Of free and friendly conversation. But then I saw a specimen of his inconsistencies; for in came Angus lairds, speaking with the most uncouth tone, and beings of other disagreeable kinds, to all of whom he was obliged to be very courteous.
I then called on Sir Alexander McDonald, and found him and my lady by themselves; then paid a visit to Lady Margaret McDonald, with whom I sat a good while. She revised in my mind lively ideas of the Eglinton family; and, by an association of ideas, had a kind of connexion with my dear cousin, now my wife, being a Margaret Montgomerie and properly of the same family. I return to Sir Alexander, and he and I walked about together, looking at Portman Square and other new buildings. The increase of London is prodigious. It is really become too large. The consequence is that people live at such a distance from each other that is very inconvenient for them to meet, and are so crowded that they confuse one another; and is easier for people who live ten or twelve miles from each other in the country to meet than it is for people who live a few street from each other in London.
I went to die my imitation that my cousin or kinsman Mr. Bosville's in Great Russell St., Bloomsbury. It was a very bad day. There fell a very heavy rain and there was the loudest thunder I ever heard. As I was going along great Russell Street it seemed to be just over my head area it was indeed very near; for not very far from where I then was it broke upon Tottenham Court Road Chapel and killed a man in the midst of Mr. Wesley's congregation. Honest Mr. Bosville received me with his usual cordiality and his lady with her usual civil formality. His daughter Miss Julia was grown the finest British woman I ever beheld, and his son Tommy was grown a stout young fellow, and was now entered to the business of a merchant in the city. There were with us his sister Mrs. Place, a widow lady, and her sister Miss Wentworth, ending Miss Jenkins, a little old crooked creature of great fortune. Nothing worthy of remark passed at dinner.
When I was last in London he was a little offended at something about, and we parted rather drily. I was anxious to meet him again, as he is a worthy, sensible, knowing man, an old friend of my father's, and has always been very kind to me. He received me with great affection, and I saw that any form of dryness was at an end. He had with him Lord Lyttleton and several more gentlemen, in particular the famous Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, whom I had a great curiosity to see. Mr. Banks was a genteel young man, very black, and of an agreeable countenance, easy and communicative, without any affectation or appearance of assuming. Dr. Solander, though a Swede, spoke English with more fluency and propriety than most natives.
I breakfasted with Capt. Hoggan, and then went to Mr. Johnson's, with whom I had an appointment to spend this day and consider the cause of the Campbeltown schoolmaster. When I came into his study, he was busy preparing a new edition of his folio dictionary, and had one Mr. Peyton writing to him and picking out words from Ainsworth. I gave them a meeting of the word side which he had omitted; viz., father's or mother's side. He said he would put it in. I asked if civilization was a word; he said no, but civility was. I suggested humiliating. He said he had seen it frequently used but he did not know if it could be allowed to be English. With great deference to him, I should think civilization, from to civilize, a good word in better than civility in that sense, as it is better to have a distinct word for each sense than one word with two senses, which civility is, in his way of using it.





