Thoughts upon Slavery
I. BY Slavery I mean, Domestic Slavery, or that of a Servant to a Master. 2. Slavery imports an obligation of perpetual Service, an obligation which only the consent of the Master can dissolve. Neither in some countries can the Master himself dissolve it, without the consent of Judges appointed by the law. It generally gives the Master an arbitrary power of any correction, not a?ecting Life or Limb.  Sometimes even these are exposed to his will: or protected only by a ?ne, or some slight punishment, too inconsiderable to restrain a Master of an harsh temper. It creates an incapacity of acquiring any thing, except for the Master's bene?t. It allows the Master to alienate the Slave, in the same manner as his cows and horses. Lastly it descends in its full extent from parent to child, even to the last generation. 
3. The beginning of this may be dated from the remotest period, of which we have an account in history. It commenced in the barbarous state of Society, and in process of time spread into all Nations. It prevailed particularly among the Jews, the Greeks, the Romans, and the ancient Germans: and was transmitted by them to the various kingdoms and states, which arose out of the Roman Empire. But after Christianity prevailed, it gradually fell into decline in almost all parts of Europe. This great change began in Spain, about the end of the Eighth Century:  and was become general in most other kingdoms of Europe before the middle of the Fourteenth. 
4. From this time Slavery was nearly extinct, till the commencement of the Sixteenth Century, when the discovery of America, and of the Western and Eastern coasts of Africa, gave occasion to the revival of it. It took its rise from the Portuguese, who to supply the Spaniards with men, to cultivate their new possessions in America, procured Negroes from Africa, whom they sold for slaves to the American Spaniards. This began in the year 1508,when they imported the ?rst Negroes into Hispaniola. In 154o, Charles the Fifth, then King o? Spain, determined to put an end to negro-slavery : Giving positive orders, That all the Negro Slaves in the Spanish Dominions should be set free. And this was accordingly done by Lagasca, whom he sent and impowered to free them all, on condition of continuing to labour for their masters. But soon after Lagasca returned to Spain, Slavery returned and flourished as before. Afterwards other nations, as they acquired possessions in America, followed the examples of the Spaniards; and Slavery has taken deep root in most of our American Colonies.
II. Such is the nature of Slavery: Such the beginning of Negroe Slavery in America. But some may desire to know, what kind of country it is, from
which the Negroe slave are brought? What sort of men, of what temper and behaviour are they in their own country? And in what manner they are generally procured, carried to, and treated in America? 
1. And ?rst, What kind of country is that from whence they are brought? Is it so remarkably horrid, dreary and barren, that it is a kindness to deliver them out of it? I believe many have apprehended so: But it is an entire mistake, if we may give credit to those who have lived many years therein, and could have no motive to misrepresent it.
2. That part o? Africa whence the Negroes are brought, commonly known by the name of Guinea, extends along the coast, in the whole, between three and four thousand miles. From the river Senegal, (Seventeen Degrees North of the Line) to Cape Sierra-Leona, it contains seven hundred miles. Thence it runs Eastward about ?fteen hundred miles, including the Grain-Coast, the Ivory- Coast, the Gold- Coast, and the Slave-Coast, with the large Kingdom of Benin. From thence it runs Southward, about twelve
hundred miles, and contains the Kingdoms of Congo and Angola. 
3. Concerning the first, the Senegal coast, Mons. Brue, who lived there sixteen years, a?ter describing its fruitfulness near the sea.
4. As to the Grain and Ivory-Coast, we learn from eye-witnesses, that the soil is in general fertile, producing abundance of rice and roots. Indigo and Cotton thrive without cultivation. Fish is in great
plenty; the ?ocks and herds are numerous, and the trees loaden with fruit. 
5. The Gold-Coast and Slave-Coast, all who have seen it agree, is exceeding fruitful and pleasant, producing vast quantities of rice and other grain, plenty of fruit and roots, palm-wine and oil, and
?sh in great abundance, with much tame and wild cattle. The very same account is given us of the soil and produce of the kingdoms of Benin, Congo and Angola. From all which it appears, that Guinea in general,is fat from an horrid, dreary, barren country, is one of the most fruitful, as well as the most pleasant countries in the known world. It is said indeed to be unhealthy. And so it is to strangers, but perfectly healthy to the native Inhabitants.
6. Such is the country from which the Negroes are brought. We come next to enquire, what sort of men they are, of what temper and behaviour, not in our Plantations, but in their native Country.
And here likewise the surest way is to take our account from eye and ear-witnesses. Now those who have lived in the Senegal Country observe, it is inhabited by three Nations, the Jaloss, Fulis and Mandingos. The King of the Jaloss has under him several Ministers, who assist in the exercise of Justice. The Chief Justice goes in circuit through all his dominions, to hear complaints and determine controversies. And the Viceroy goes with him, to inspect the behaviour o? the Alkadi, or governor of each village. The Fulis are governed by their Chief men, who rule with much moderation. Few of them will drink any thing stronger than water, being strict Mohametans. The Government is easy, because the
people are of a quiet and good disposition; and so well instructed in what is right, that a man who Wrongs another is the abomination of all.  - They desire no more land than they use, which they cultivate with great care and industry: if any of them are known to be made slaves by the white men they all join to
redeem them. They not only support all that are old, or blind, or lame among themselves; but have frequently supplied the necesseties of the Mandingos, when they were distrest by famine.
7. The Mandingos, says Mons. Brue, are right Mahometans, drinking neither wine nor brandy. They are industrious and laborious, keeping their ground well cultivated, and breeding a good flock of Cattle. Every town has a Governor, and he appoints
the labour o? the people. The men work the ground designed for corn; the women and girls, the rice-grounds. He afterwards divides the corn and rice, among them: And decides all quarrels, if any arise. All the Mahometan Negroes constantly go to public
Prayers thrice a day: there being a priest in every village, who regularly calls them together: And it is surprizing to see the modesty, attention and reverence which they observe during their worship. - These three Nations practise several trades; they have Smiths, Sadlers, Potters and Weavers. And they are very ingenious at their several occupations. Their Smiths not only make all the instruments of iron which they have occasion to use, but likewise
work many things neatly in Gold and Silver. It is chie?y the Women and children who weave ?ne cotton cloth, which they dye blue and black.
8. It was of these parts of Guinea that Mons. Adanson, Correspondent of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris, from 1749 to 1753, gives the following account, both as to the country and people. 
9. The inhabitants of the Grain and Ivory Coast are represented by those that deal with them, as sensible, courteous, and the fairest traders on the coasts of Guinea. They rarely drink to excess: If any do they are severely punished by the King's order. They are seldom troubled with War: If a di?erence happen between two nations, they commonly end the dispute amicably. 
The inhabitants of the Gold and Slave Coast likewise, when they are not artfully incensed against each other, live in great union and friendship, being generally well tempered, civil, tractable, and ready t0 help any that need it. In particular, the natives of the kingdom of Whidab are civil, kind, and obliging to strangers: And they are the most gentleman-like of all the Negroes, abounding in good manners toward each other. The inferiors pay the utmost respect to their superiors: So Wives to their husbands, Children to their Parents. And they are remarkably industrious; all are constantly employ'd; the men in agriculture, the women in spinning and weaving cotton.
The Gold and Slave-Coasts are divided into several districts, some governed by Kings, others by the principal men who take care each of their own town or village, and prevent or appease tumults. They punish Murder and Adultery severely; very frequently with Death. Theft and Robbery are punished by a ?ne proportionable to the goods that were taken.  - All the natives of this coast, though
heathens, believe there is One GOD, the Author of them and all things. They appear likewise to have a confused apprehension of a future state. And accordingly every town and village has a place of
public worship.  - It is remarkable that they have no Beggars among them. Such is the care of the chief men in every city and village, to provide some easy labour, even for the old and weak.  Some employed in blowing the Smith's bellows; others in
pressing palm-oil; others in grinding of colours. If they are too  weak even for this, they sell Provisions in the Market.
11. The natives of the kingdom of Benin are a reasonable and good-natured people; They are sincere and ino?ensive; And do no injustice either to one another or to strangers. They are eminently civil and courteous: If you make them a present they endeavour to repay it double. And if they are trusted, till the ship returns the next year; they are sure honestly to pay the whole debt. Theft is 
punished among them, altho' not with the same severity as Murder. If a man and woman of any quality, are taken in adultery, they are certain to be put to death, and their bodies thrown on a dunghill and left a prey to wild beasts. They are punctually just
and honest in their dealings; and also very charitable: the King and the great Lords taking care to employ all that are capable of any work. And those that are utterly helpless they keep for God's Sake; so that here also are no Beggars. The inhabitants of Congo and Angola are generally a quiet people. They discover a good understanding, and behave in a friendly manner to strangers, being of a mild temper and an a?able carriage. - Upon the whole therefore the Negroes wh0 inhabit the coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to the Southern bounds of Angola, are so far from being the stupid, senseless, brutish, lazy barbarians, the fierce, cruel, per?dious Savages they have been described, that on the contrary, they are represented by them who have no motive to flatter them, as remarkably sensible, considering the few advantages they have for improving their understanding: As industrious to the highest degree, perhaps more so than any other natives o? so warm a climate: As fair, just and honest in all their dealings, unless where White men have taught them to be otherwise:  And, as far more mild, friendly and kind to strangers, than any of our Forefathers were. Our Forefathers! When shall we
find at this day, among the fair-faced natives of Europe, a nation  practising the justice, Mercy, and Truth, which are found among these poor Africans?  Suppose the preceding accounts are true, (which I see no reason or pretence to doubt of) and we may leave England and France, to seek genuine Honesty in Benin; Congo, or Angola.
III. We have now seen what kind of Country it is, from which the Negroes are brought:  And what sort of men(even White-men being the Judges) they were in their own Country.  Enquire ,we
Thirdly, In what manner are they generally procured, carried to, and treated in America. 
1.  First. In what manner are they procured? Part of them by fraud. Captains of Ships from time to time, have invited Negroes to come on board, and then carried them away. But far more have been procured by force. The Christians landing upon their coasts, seized as many as they found, men, women and children, and transported them to America. It was about 1551, that the English began trading to Guinea: At ?rst, for Gold and Elephants teeth, but soon after, for Men.1556, Sir John Hawkins sailed with two ships to Cape Verd, where he sent eighty men on shore to catch Negroes. But the natives ?ying, they fell farther down, and these
set the men on shore, “to burn their towns and take the inhabitants." But they met with such resistance, that they had seven men killed, and took but ten Negroes. So they went still farther down, till having taken enough, they proceeded to the 
West-Indies and sold them.
2. It was some time before the Europeans found a more compendious way of procuring African Slaves, by prevailing upon them to make war upon each other, and to sell their Prisoners. Till then seldom had any wars: but were in general quiet and peaceable. But the white men ?rst taught them drunkenness and avarice, and then hired them to sell one Another. Nay, by this means, even their Kings are induced to sell their own subjects. So Mr. Moore (Factor of the African Company in 1730) informs us. That their own parents sell them, is utterly false: Whites not Blacks, are without natural a?ection!
3. To set the manner wherein Negroes are procured in a yet stronger light, it will su?ce to give an extract of two voyages to Guinea on this account. The first is taken verbatim from the original manuscript of the Surgeon's Journal. 
4. The second Extract taken from the Journal of a Surgeon who went from New York on the same trade, is as follows. - Such is the
manner wherein the Negroes are procured! Thus the Christians preach the Gospel to the Heathens!
5. Thus they are procured. But in what numbers and in what manner, are they carried to America? - Mr. Anderson in his history of Trade and Commerce, observes; That is, so many are taken on board our ships; but at least ten thousand of them die in the voyage: About a fourth part more die at the different islands, in what is called the seasoning. So that at an average, in the passage and seasoning together, thirty thousand die: that is, properly are murdered. O Earth, O Sea, cover not thou their blood! 
6. When they are brought down to the shore in order to be sold, our Surgeons thoroughly examine them, and that quite naked, women and men, without any distinction: Those that are approved are set on one side. In the mean time a burning iron, with the arms or name of the Company, lies in the fire, with which they are mark'd on the breast. Before they are put into the ships, their masters strip them of all they have on their backs: So that they come on board stark naked, women as well as men. It is common for several hundred bf them to be put on board one vessel: I where they are stowed together in as little room, as it is possible for them to be crowded. It is easy to suppose what a condition they must soon be in, between heat, thirst and stench of various kinds.  So that it is no wonder, so many should die in the passage; but rather that any survive it.
7. When the vessels arrive at their destined port, the Negroes are again exposed naked, to the eyes of all that flock together, and the examination of their purchasers: Then they are separated to the plantations of their several Masters, to see each other no more. Here you may see Mothers hanging over their daughters, bedewing their naked breasts with tears, and daughters clinging to their parents, till the Whipper soon obliges them to part. And what can be more wretched than the condition they then enter upon? Banished from their country, from their friends and relations for ever, from every comfort of life, they are reduced to a state scarce any way preferable to that of beasts of burden. In general a few roots, not of the nicest kind, usually yams or potatoes, are their food, and two rags, that neither screen them from the heat of the day, nor the cold of the night; their covering. Their sleep is very short, their labour continual, and frequently above their strength; so that death sets many of them at liberty,
before they have lived out half their days. The time they work in the West Indies, is from day-break to noon, and from two-o'clock till dark: During which time they are attended by overseers, who, if they think them dilatory, or think any thing not so well done as it should be, whip them most unmercifully, so that you may see their bodies long after wheal'd and scarred usually from the shoulders to the waist. And before they are suffered to go to their quarters, they have commonly something to do, as collecting herbage for the horses, or gathering fewel for the boilers. So that it is often past twelve before they can get home. Hence if their food is not prepared, they are sometimes called to labour again, before
they can satisfy their hunger. And no excuse will avail. If they are not in the ?eld immediately, they must expect to feel the lash. Did the Creator intend that the n0blest Creatures in the visible world,
should live such a life as this!
9. But will not the laws made in the Plantations, prevent or redress all Cruelty and Oppression? We will take but a few of those Laws for a specimen and then let any man judge.
Will not these Law-givers take e?ectual care, to prevent cruelty and Oppression? 
So their law treats these poor men with as little ceremony
and consideration, as if they were merely brute beasts! But the innocent blood which is shed in consequence of such a detestable law, must call for vengeance on the murderous abetters and actors of such deliberate wickedness. 
We have seen already some of the ways and means which have been thought fit on such occasions. And many more might be mentioned. One Gentleman, when I was abroad, thought fit to roast his slave alive! But if the most natural act of “running
away" from intolerable tyranny, deserves such relentless severity, what punishment have these Lawmakers to expect hereafter, on account of their own enormous o?ences?
IV. 1. This is the plain, un-aggravared matter of fact. Such is the manner wherein our African Slaves are procured: Such the manner wherein they are removed from their native land, and wherein they are treated in our Plantations. I would now enquire, Whether these things can be defended, on the principles of even Heathen Honesty? Whether they can be reconciled (setting the Bible out of the question) with any degree of either Justice, or
Mercy?
2. The grand plea is, "They are authorized by Law."  But can Law, Human Law, change the nature of things? Can it turn Darkness into Light, or evil into good? By no means. Notwithstanding
ten thousand Laws, right is right, and wrong is wrong still. There must still remain an essential difference between Justice and Injustice, Cruelty and Mercy. So that I still ask, Who can reconcile this treatment of the Negroes, ?rst and last, with either Mercy or Justice?
Where is the Justice of in?icting the severest evils, on those that have done us no wrong? Of depriving those that never injured us in word or deed, of every comfort of life? Of tearing them from their native country, and depriving them of liberty itself? To
which an Angolan, has the same natural right as an Englishman, and on which he sets as high a value? Yea where is the Justice of taking away the Lives of innocent, ino?ensive men? Murdering thousands of them in their own land, by the hands of their own
countrymen: Many Thousands, year after year, on shipboard, and then casting them like dung into the sea! And tens of thousands in that cruel slavery, to which they are so unjustly reduced?
3. But waving, for the present, all other considerations, I strike at the root of this complicated villainy, I absolutely deny all Slave-holding to be consistent with any degree of natural justice. 
I cannot place this in a clearer light, than that great ornament of his profession, Judge Blackstone has already done. 
4. That Slave-holding is utterly inconsistent with Mercy, is almost too plain to need a proof. I answer, 1. Did Sir John Hawkins, and
many others, seize upon men, women and children, who were at peace in their own fields and houses, merely to save them from death? 2. Was it to save them from death, that they knock'd out the brains of those they could not bring away? 3. Who occasioned and fomented those wars, wherein these poor creatures were taken prisoners? Who excited them by money, by drink, by every possible means, to fall upon one another? Was it not themselves?
They know in their own conscience it was, if they have any conscience left. But 4. To bring the matter to a short issue. Can they say before GOD, That they ever took a single voyage, or bought a single Negro from this motive? They cannot, They well know, to get money, not to save lives, was the whole and sole spring of their Motions.
5. But if this manner of procuring and treating Negroes is not consistent either with mercy or justice, yet there is a plea for it which every man of business will acknowledge to be quite su?cient.  Fifty years ago, one meeting an eminent Statesman in the Lobby of the House of Commons. I answer, You stumble at the threshold: I deny that villany is ever necessary. It is impossible that it should ever be necessary, for any reasonable creature to violate all the laws of justice, Mercy, and Truth. No circumstances can make it necessary for a man to burst in sunder all the ties of humanity, it can never be necessary for a rational being to sink
himself below a brute. A man can be under no necessity, of degrading himself into a wolf. The absurdity of the supposition is so glaring, that one would wonder anyone could help seeing it.
6. This in general. But to be more particular. I ask, 1. What is necessary? And Secondly, To what end? It may be answered, "The whole method now used by the original purchasers of Negroes, is necessary to the furnishing our Colonies yearly with a hundred thousand Slaves." I grant this is necessary to that End. But how is that End necessary? How will you prove it necessary that one hundred, that one of those slaves should be procured?” “Why,
it is necessary to my gaining an hundred thousand pounds." Perhaps so: But how is this necessary? It is very possible you might be both a better and a happier man, if you had net a quarter of it. I deny that your gaining one thousand is necessary, either to your present or eternal happiness.  “But however you must allow, these slaves are necessary f0r the cultivation of our Islands: inasmuch as white men are not able to labour in hot climates." I answer,
I. It were better that all those Islands should remain uncultivated for ever, yea, it were more desirable that they were altogether sunk in the depth of the sea, than that they should be cultivated at so high a price, as the violation of justice, Mercy and Truth. But, Secondly, the supposition on which you ground your argument is false.  For white men, even English men, are well able to labour in hot climates: provided they are temperate both in meat and drink,
and that they inure themselves to it by degrees. I speak no more than I know by Experience. It appears from the Thermometer that the Summer Heat in Georgia, is frequently equal to that in Barbadoes, yea to that under the Line.  And yet I and my Family (Eight in number) did employ all our spare time there, in felling of trees and clearing of ground, as hard labour as any Negro need be employed in. The German Family likewise, forty in number, were employed in all manner of labour. And thin was so far from impairing our Health, that we all continued perfectly well, while the idle ones round about us, were swept away as with a pestilence. It is not true therefore that white men are not able to
labour, even in hot climates, full as well as black. But if they were not, it would be better that none should labour there, that the work sh0uld be left undone, than that myriads of innocent men should be murdered, and myriads more dragged into the
basest Slavery.
7. "But the furnishing us with Slaves is necessary, for the Trade, and Wealth, and Glory 0f 0ur Nation :" Here are several mistakes. For 1. Wealth is not necessary to the Glory of any Nation; but
Wisdom, Virtue, Justice, Mercy, Generosity, Public Spirit, Love of our Country. These are necessary to the real Glory of a Nation; but abundance of Wealth is not. Men of understanding allow, that the Glory of England was full as high, in Queen Elizabeth’s time as it is now: Although our riches and trade were then as much smaller, as our Virtue was greater. But, Secondly, it is not dear, that we
should have either: less Money or Trade, (only less of that detestable trade of man-stealing) if there was not a Negro in all our Islands, or in all English America. It is demonstrable, White men, inured to it by degrees can work as well as them; And they
would do it, were Negroes out of the way, and proper encouragement given them. However, Thirdly, I come back to the same point: Better no Trade, than trade procured by villany. It is far better to have no Wealth, than to gain Wealth at the expence of Virtue. Better is honest Poverty, than all the Riches bought by the tears, and sweat and blood of our fellow creatures. 
8. "However this be, it is necessary when we have Slaves, to use them with severity." What, to whip them f0r every petty o?ence, till they are all in gore blood ? To take that opportunity of rubbing
pepper and salt into their raw ?esh? To drop burning sealing wax upon their skin? To castrate them? To cut o? half their foot with an axe? To hang them on gibbers, that they may die by inches, with heat, and hunger, and thirst? To pin them down to the ground, and then burn them by degrees, from the feet, to the head?  To roast them alive? - When did a Turk or a Heathen find it necessary to use a fellow-creature thus?
I pray, to what end is this usage necessary? "Why, to prevent their running away: And to keep them constantly to their labour, that they may not idle away their time. So miserably stupid is this
race of men, yea, so stubborn and so wicked." Allowing them to be as stupid as you say, to whom is that stupidity owing? Without question it lies altogether at the door of their inhuman Masters: Who give them no means, no opportunity of improving their understanding: And indeed leave them no motive, either from hope or fear, to attempt any such thing. They were no way remarkable for stupidity, while they remained in their own country: The inhabitants of Africa where they have equal motives and equal means of improvement, are not inferior to the inhabitants of Europe: To some of them they are greatly superior. Impartially survey in their own country, the natives of Benin, and the natives of Lapland. Compare, (setting prejudice aside) the
Samoeids and the Angolans.  And on which side does the advantage lie, in point of understanding? Certainly the African is in no respect inferior to the European. Their stupidity therefore in our plantations is not natural; otherwise than it is the natural
e?ect of their Condition. Consequently it is not their fault, but Your's : You must answer for it, before GOD and Man. 
9. “But their Stupidity is not the only reason of our treating them with severity, For it is hard to say, which is the greatest, This or their Stubbornness and Wickedness.” - It may be so: But do not these as well as the other, lie at your door;
Are not Stubbornness, Cunning, Pilfering, and divers other vices, the natural, necessary fruits of Slavery? Is not this an observation which has been made, in every age and nation? - And what means have you used to remove this stubbornness? Have you tried what Mildness and Gentleness would do? I knew one that did: that had prudence and patience to make the experiment: Mr. Hugh Bryan, who then lived on the borders of South Carolina. And what was the e?ect? Why, that all his Negroes (And he had no small number of them) loved and reverenced him as a Father, and chearfully obeyed him out of love. Yea, they were more afraid of a frown from him, than of many blows from an over-seer. And what pains have you taken, what method have you used, to reclaim them from
their wickedness? If you have not done this, if you have taken no
pains or thought about the matter, can you wonder at their wickedness? What wonder, it they should cut your throat? And if they did, whom could you thank for it but yourself? You ?rst acted the villain in making them slaves, (whether you stole them or
bought them.) You kept them stupid and wicked, by cutting them o? from all opportunities of improving either in Knowledge or Virtue: And now you assign their want of Wisdom and Goodness as the reason for using them worse than brute beasts!
V. 1. It remains only to make a little application of the preceding observations. - But to whom should that application be made? That may bear a question. Should we address yourselves to the Public at large? What e?ect can this have? It may in?ame the World against the guilty, but is not likely to remove that guilt. Should we appeal to the English nation in general? This also is striking wide; And is never likely to procure any redress for the sore evil we complain 0f. - As little would it in all probability avail, to apply to the Parliament. So many things, which seem of greater importance lie before them that they are not likely to attend to this. I therefore add a few words to those who are more
immediately concerned, whether Captains, Merchants or Planters.
2. And, ?rst, to the Captains employed in this trade. Most of you know the country Guinea: Several parts of it at least, between the River Senegal and the kingdom of Angola. Perhaps now, by your
means, part of it is become a dreary uncultivated wilderness, the inhabitants being all murdered or carried away, so that there are none left to till the ground. But you well know, how populous, how
fruitful, how pleasant it was a few years ago. You know the people were not stupid, not wanting in sense, considering the few means of improvement they enjoyed. Neither did you ?nd them savage,
?erce, cruel, treacherous, or unkind to strangers. On the contrary, they were in most parts, a sensible and ingenious people. They were kind and friendly, courteous and obliging, and remarkably fair and just in their dealings. Such are the men whom you hire their own country-men, to tear away from this lovely country; part by stealth, part by force, part made captive in those wars, which you raise or foment on purpose. You have seen them torn away,
Children from their Parents, Parents from their Children: Husbands from their Wives, Wives from their beloved Husbands, Brcthren and Sisters from each other. You have dragged them who had never done you any wrong, perhaps in chains, from their native shore. You have forced them into your ships like a herd of swine, them who had souls immortal as your own: (Only some of them leaped into the sea, and resolutely layed under water, till they could su?er no more from you.) You have stowed them together as close as ever they could lie, without any regard either to decency or convenience. And when many of them had been poisoned by foul air, or had sunk under various hardships, you have seen their remains delivered to the deep, till the sea should give up his dead. You have carried the survivors into the vilest slavery, never to end but with life: Such Slavery as is not found among the Turks at Algiers, no nor among the Heathens in America.
3. May I speak plainly to you? I must. Love constrains me: Love to you, as well as to those you are concerned with.
Is there a GOD? You know there is. Is He a Just GOD? Then there must be a state of Retribution: A state wherein the Just GOD will reward every man according to his works. Then what reward will he render to You? O think betimes! Before you drop into eternity! Think now, He shall have Judgement without mercy that hath shewed no mercy.
Are you a man? Then you should have an human heart. But have you indeed? What is your heart made of? Is there no such principle as Compassion there? Do you never feel another's pain? Have you no Sympathy? No sense of human woe? No pity for the miserable? When you saw the ?owing eyes, the heaving breasts, or the bleeding sides and tortured limbs of your fellow creatures, was you a stone, or a brute? Did you look upon them with the eyes of a tiger? When you squeezed the agonizing creatures down in the ship, or when you, threw their poor mangled remains into the sea, had you no relenting? Did not one tear dr0p from your eye, one sigh escape from your breast? Do you feel no relenting now? If you do not, you must go on, till the measure of your iniquities is full.  Then will the Great GOD deal with you, as you have dealt with them, and require all their blood at your hands. And at that day it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than f0r you! But if your heart does relent, though in a small degree, know it is a call from the GOD of Love. And to-day, if you will hear his voice, harden not your heart. To-day resolve, GOD being your helper, to escape for your life, Regard not money! All that a Man hath will he give for his Life! That ever you lose, lose not your soul: nothing can countervail that loss. Immediately quit the horrid trade: At all events, be an honest man.
4. This equally concerns every Merchant, who is engaged in the Slave-trade. It is you that induce the African villain to sell his countrymen; and in order thereto, to steal, rob, murder men, women and children without number: By enabling the English
Villain to pay him for so doing; Whom you over pay for his execrable labour. It is your money, that is the spring of all, that impowers him to go on: So that whatever he or the African does in this matter, is all your act and deed. And is your conscience quite reconciled to this? Does it never reproach you at all? Has gold entirely blinded your eyes, and stupified your heart? Can you see, can you feel no harm therein? Is it doing as you would be done to?
Make the case your own. “Master, said a slave at Liverpool to the Merchant that owned him) "what if some of my countrymen were to come here, and take away my Mistress, and Master Tommy and
Master Billy and carry them into our country, and make them slaves, how would you like it?" His answer was Worthy of a man: "I will never buy a slave more while I live." O let his resolution be
Your’s! Have no more any part in this detestable business. Instantly leave it to those unfeeling wretches, “Who laugh at human nature and compassion! Be you a man! Not a wolf, a devourer of the human species! Be merciful, that you may
obtain mercy!
5. And this equally concerns every Gentleman that has an estate in our American Plantations: Yea all Slave-holders of whatever rank and degree: seeing Men-buyers are exactly on a level with Men-
stealers. Indeed you say, “I pay honestly for my goods: and I am not concerned to know how they are come by: Nay but you are: You are deeply concerned to know they are honestly come by. Otherwise you are partaker with a thief, and are not a jot
honester than Him. But you know, they are not honestly come by. You know they are procured by means, nothing near so innocent as picking of pockets, house-breaking, or robbery upon the high-way. You know they are procured by a deliberate series of more complicated villany, (of fraud, robbery and murder) than was even practised either by Mahometans or Pagans: in particular by murders, of all kinds; by the blood of the innocent poured upon
the ground like water. Now it is your money that pays the Merchant, and thro' him the Captain, and the African Butchers. You therefore are guilty, yea principally guilty, of all these frauds, robberies and murders. You are the spring that puts all the rest
in motion: they would not stir a step without you: Therefore the blood of all these wretches, wh0 die before their time, whether in their country, or elsewhere lies upon your head. The blood of thy brother, (for whether thou wilt believe it or no, such he is in the
fight of Him that made him) crieth against thee from the earth, from the ship, and from the waters. O, whatever it costs, put a stop to its cry before it be too late: Instantly, at any price, were it the half of your goods, deliver thyself from blood-guiltiness! Thy hands, thy bed, thy furniture, thy house, thy lands are at present stained with blood. Surely it is enough; accumulate no more guilt: spill no more the blood of the innocent! Do not hire another to
shed blood: Do not pay him for doing it! Whether you are a Christian or no, shew yourself a man! Be not more savage than a lion or a bear!
6. Perhaps you will say, “I do not buy any Negroes: I only use those left me by my Father." So far is well: but is it enough to satisfy  your own conscience? Had your Father, have you, has any 
man living, a right to use another as a slave? It cannot be, even setting Revelation aside. It cannot be, that either War, or contract, can give any man such a property in another as he has in his sheep and oxen. Much less is it possible, that any child of man, should
ever be born a slave. Liberty is the right of every human creature, as soon as he breathes the vital air. And no human law can deprive him of that right, which he derives from the law of nature.
I? therefore you have any regard to Justice, (to say nothing of Mercy, nor the revealed Law of GOD) render unto all their due. Give Liberty to whom Liberty is due, that is to every child of man,
to every partaker of human nature. Let none serve
you but by his own act and deed, by his own voluntary choice. Away with all whips, all chains, all compulsion! Be gentle toward all men, And see that you invariably do unto every one, as you would he should do unto you.
O thou GOD of Love, thou who art loving to every man, and whose mercy is over all thy works; Thou who art the Father of the Spirits of all flesh, and who art rich in mercy unto all; Thou who hast mingled of one blood, all the nations upon earth; Have compassion upon these outcasts of men, who are trodden down as dung upon the earth! Arise and help these that have no helper, whose blood is spilt upon the ground like water! Are not these also the work of thine own hands, the purchase of thy Son's blood? Stir them up to cry unto thee in the land of their captivity; and let their complaint come up before thee; let it enter into thy ears! Make even those that lead them away captive to pity them, and turn their captivity as the rivers in the South. 'O burst thou all their chains in sunder; more especially the chains of their sins: Thou, Saviour of all, make them free, that they may be free in deed.
