Had all those who have had a hand in this anti-Christian business, by which so many millions of our fellow-men have been murdered or treated as brutes, or both, been disposed to take as much pains, and be at as great cost to send the gospel to Africa and instruct and Christianize the many nations in that part of the world, as they have taken and expended to enslave and destroy them, and thus prejudice them against Christianity, they would probably have been the means of spreading the gospel over that vast continent, of civilizing those barbarous nations, and of the salvation of millions, and would have prevented the destruction and misery of which they have been the occasion and instruments, and would have had the reward of such a benevolent work, and escaped the guilt which now lies upon them and the awful consequence.
This observation opens a scene to our view which is enough to overwhelm the attentive, pious mind, and must, therefore, be now only mentioned. A future judgment, an eternity to come, will unfold the whole, of which we can now have but a transient glimpse.
This enormous iniquity and wide-spreading evil — the slave trade, with its consequences, which has been carried on and advanced to such a degree for more than a century by kings and their people in the Christian world — is an evidence, among many others, and serves to confirm the opinion, that the sixth vial, mentioned in the sixteenth chapter of the Revelation, has been running during this time. It is there predicted, that under this vial three unclean spirits, the spirits of devils, working miracles or wonderful things, should go forth to the whole world, to gather them together to the battle of that great day
of God Almighty.
The work of these spirits is to excite men, especially in the Christian world, to extraordinary and wonderful degrees of wickedness, by which they unite in arming themselves against Heaven, and are prepared for the judgments which will follow. Who can attend to the slave trade, in the manner in which it has been prosecuted, with the extent and consequences of it, and not be convinced that the hand and power of Satan has been in an extraordinary degree exerted and manifested in it, stirring men up to a kind and degree of wickedness and mischief which was not known before?
And shall this shameful practice, this evil, which has got such deep root, and is spread so far and wide, never have an end? Can no stop be put to those wicked men who are devouring their fellow-men who are more righteous than they? Must this gross and open violation of the rights of man, of the laws of God, and the benevolent religion of the Savior continue forever? Shall the horrid scene of unrighteousness, violence, cruelty, and misery, which has so long taken place in
the West Indies and Africa, never be abolished?
Thanks be to God! He has assured us that ail these works of the devil shall be destroyed, and that the time is hastening on, when all the people shall be righteous and benevolent, and there shall be none to destroy or hurt in all the earth; and what has taken place of late, gives reason of hope and confidence that this sore evil will soon be made to cease. The attention of thousands and millions has been awakened and turned to this subject; much has been written upon it, and light and conviction have had a rapid and extensive circulation. Numerous societies have been voluntarily formed wholly to abolish this evil; and there is reason to conclude that this light and conviction, and these exertions, will continue and increase till the slave traders shall be utterly destroyed.
But why is this work still opposed or neglected by any? Why are not the cries of the millions of Africans in bondage heard by all? Why do they make no more impression on the public mind, and rouse all to feel for the wretchedness of so great a part of their fellow-men, and to exertions for their relief? Why is the British Parliament so slow to abolish the slave trade, and no more influenced by the evidence laid before them of the cruelties and murders which attend this traffic, and of the moral and political evils produced by it, and by the repeated, earnest, and powerful applications made to them?
And as to some of us Americans, what shall we say? We have reason to reflect with painful shame upon the hand we have had in this iniquity, by which so many thousands of our fellow-men, as good by nature as we are, have been destroyed, or put into a state of the most abject slavery, in the West Indies, or brought to this continent and sold like cattle, and, in most instances, treated as if they were not men.
In the year 1774, when Britain appeared to threaten a war with us, and was disposed to deny to us some part of the liberty which we claimed, and we had a prospect of entering into a bloody contest in defence of our own rights, the slave trade, which had been practised by us, appeared so inconsistent with our contending for our own liberty, that a Congress, which then represented these now United States, made a solemn resolution, in the name of all the people whom they represented, in the following words: "We will neither import, nor purchase any slaves imported, after the first day of December
next; after which time we will wholly discontinue the slave trade, and will neither be concerned in it ourselves, nor will we hire our vessels, or sell our commodities or manufactures, to those who are concerned in it." And all the people appeared to acquiesce in this resolution, as reasonable, important, and necessary, in order to act a consistent part while contending for their own liberties, and to have any ground of hope in the protection and smiles of a righteous God, and success in the struggle into which we were entering. With this resolution we entered the combat, and God appeared to be on our side, and wrought wonders in our favor, disappointed those who rose up against us, and established us a free and independent nation.
After all this, could it have been expected, would it have been believed, if predicted, that such a resolution, so reasonable and important, on which the hope of success was in a great measure grounded, and which was doubtless one means of it, should be so far forgotten and counteracted that a convention, met to form a constitution, could not agree upon one, unless it did secure the continuance of the importation of slaves, for a number of years at least? — that the Congress of the United States should so long neglect to suppress this trade, so far as it is acknowledged they have authority to do it, through the opposition made to such a measure by a small minority? — that notwithstanding laws have been made by a number of these states, prohibiting this trade in human flesh, it is yet carried on openly, (horresco referens,) especially in this state, and yet the law be eluded, and cannot be executed? —  that there are hundreds of thousands of slaves in these states, and no effectual measures are taken, where the most of them are, to give them a proper education and emancipate them, as soon as it may be done consistent with their best good and that of the public?
When all this is taken into view by the truly pious, who fear God and believe his word, is it to be wondered at that their flesh trembleth for fear of the righteous judgments of God? Are they to be condemned as superstitious enthusiasts? Have we not all reason to fear that the vengeance of Heaven will fall upon us, as a people, in ways perhaps which are not now thought of, unless we repent and reform?
But may we not hope for better things? — that this evil practice will be better investigated, and soon utterly suppressed? — that benevolence and compassion towards the miserable Africans will be so sensibly, and with such strength, exercised towards them by the people in general, that all proper measures will be taken to make them a free and happy people? And if it be necessary, in order to this, that they should return to Africa, — the continent which seems to be best suited to their constitution, — may we not wish and hope that such a desire to compensate them, as far as we may, for the injuries we have done them, and such a spirit of benevolence will be excited, that we shall with cheerfulness contribute every thing necessary to answer this end?
We may hope that all this dark and dreadful scene will not only have an end, but is designed by the Most High to be the means of introducing the gospel among the nations in Africa; that those who have embraced the gospel while among us, with all who have been, or may be, in some good measure civilized and instructed, will, by our assistance, return to Africa, and spread the light of the gospel in that now dark part of the world, and propagate those arts, and that science, which shall recover them from that ignorance and barbarity which now prevail, to be a civilized, Christian, and happy people, making as great improvement in all useful knowledge, and in the practice of righteousness, benevolence, and piety, as has yet been done by any people on earth, and much greater. Thus all this past and present evil which the Africans have suffered by the slave trade, and the slavery to which so many of them have been reduced, may be the occasion of an over-balancing good; and it may hereafter appear, as it has in the case of Joseph being sold a slave into Egypt, and the oppression and slavery of the Israelites by the Egyptians, that though the slave traders have really meant and done that which is evil, yet God has designed it all for good, the good of which all this evil shall be the occasion.
Ought not this prospect to animate us earnestly to pray for such a happy event, and to exert ourselves to the utmost to promote it? Can we be indifferent and negligent in this matter, without slighting and disobeying the command of Christ, to go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature? And will not such an attempt to send the gospel to Africa, being willing to spare no expense or labor thus to spread the knowledge of the Savior among the nations there, be a proper expression of our love and regard to this benevolent, important injunction?
To this end, let us be firm, wise, and active in pursuing every proper measure to abolish the slave trade and put an end to the slavery of the Africans, which is so contrary to the gospel, and has opposed and is now a hinderance to the propagation of it in Africa, and is so injurious to the spiritual and temporal interest of all who have any connection with it.
May none of this respectable society, from selfish and sinister views, or from fear of man, or partial favor and affection to any, or from indolence and neglect, act a part inconsistent with the benevolent design of it, or unworthy of a member of it; but may every one, with the utmost care, circumspection, fidelity, and fortitude, act a consistent part, and persevere in constant endeavors to promote the important end of this institution, whatever may be the opposition from ignorant, interested men, knowing that he is engaged in the cause of God and human nature.
Let us consult and determine what we may do in favor of the blacks among us, especially those who are free, in protecting them from oppression and injuries, by encouraging and assisting them to industry and a prudent management of their worldly affairs, attempting to reform the vicious, to instruct the ignorant, and promote morality, virtue, and religion among them, and providing for the education of their children in useful learning, that they may be raised to an acknowledged equality with the white people, and some of them, of the most promising abilities and piety, be fitted to preach the gospel to their brethren in Africa, and that numbers may be the better prepared to move to that region, and settle there, and set an example of industry and wisdom in cultivating the land of that fertile country, and of the practice of Christianity, which will have the best tendency to civilize those now barbarous nations, to spread the light of the gospel among them, and persuade them to be Christians.
Is there not good reason to believe, that if this nation, the inhabitants in the United States of America, both high and low, rulers and ruled, had a proper view and sense of the unrighteousness of the slave trade and the slavery of the Africans, and of the sore calamity and misery of millions of our fellow-men in Africa, the West Indies, and on this continent, as the effect of this iniquity, not only a stop would be put to this trade, and all the slaves among us be set free as fast as possible, but such strong compassion would be excited towards these injured, miserable men, and desire and zeal to make all possible compensation to them, and render them happy, that no exertions or expense would be thought too much which would be required to transport those to Africa who should be disposed to go and settle there, and to furnish them with every thing necessary and convenient for their being settled there in the best circumstances suited to promote their temporal and eternal happiness, and of the nations on that vast continent? How happy, if we, as a people and nation, should cheerfully unite in this from motives of justice and benevolence, and a desire that the gospel may be preached to every creature! How unhappy, if we should be forced to part with the slaves in these states, and send them away, from the motives of fear and distress which induced the Egyptians to part with their dearest treasures in order to thrust out and send the Israelites from them, whom they had injured and abused! It is very possible that one of these may take place.
If the former, and we should cheerfully agree to do this injured people all the justice and show them all the kindness in our power, we should not only take the most probable method to avert the divine judgments and obtain the smiles of Heaven, and take, perhaps, the best method in our reach to promote the propagation of the gospel, but we, especially some of the southern states in the Union, would be delivered from the sin and calamity of the slavery which now takes place, which is a great moral and political evil, however insensible they may now be of it . And such a settlement in Africa, properly conducted and supported, might be greatly beneficial to the commercial interest both of this nation and of those in Africa, and, in the end, produce a temporal good and prosperity, which might, as far as is now practicable, atone for the evils of the slave trade and slavery.
But, be this as it may, we may be assured that we are engaged in a cause which will finally prosper. The slave trade, and all slavery, shall be totally abolished, and the gospel shall be preached to all nations; good shall be brought out of all the evil which takes place, and all men shall be united into one family and kingdom under Christ the Savior; and the meek shall inherit the earth, and delight themselves in the abundance of peace. In the prospect of this we may rejoice in the midst of the darkness and evils which now surround us, and think ourselves happy if we may be, in any way, the active instruments of hastening on this desirable predicted event. Amen. 
The proposal of assisting the blacks among us to go and make a settlement in Africa, which has been mentioned in the preceding discourse, I have thought to be of such importance as to require a more particular explanation to be laid before the public, with the reasons for it, for their consideration; hoping that, if it be generally approved, it will excite those united, generous exertions which are necessary in order to effect it. 
There are a considerable number of free blacks in New England and in other parts of the United States, some of whom are industrious and of a good moral character, and some of them appear to be truly pious, who are desirous to remove to Africa and settle there. They who are religious would be glad to unite as Christian brethren, and move to Africa, having one instructor or more, and cultivate the land which they may obtain there, and maintain the practice of Christianity in the sight of their now heathen brethren, and endeavor to instruct and civilize them, and spread the knowledge of the gospel among them.
In order to effect this in the best manner, a vessel must be procured, and proper sailors provided to go to Africa, with a number of persons, both white and black, perhaps, who shall be thought equal to the business, to search that country, and find a place where a settlement may be made with the consent of the inhabitants there; the land being given by them, or purchased of them, and so as best to answer the ends proposed. If such a place can be found, as no doubt it may, they must return, and the blacks must be collected who are willing to go and settle there, and form themselves into a civil society, by agreeing in a constitution and a code of laws, by which they will be regulated.
And they must be furnished with every thing necessary and proper to transport and settle them there in a safe and comfortable manner; with shipping and provisions, till they can procure them in Africa by their own labor; and with instruments and utensils necessary to cultivate the land, build houses, etc., and have all the protection and assistance they will need, while settling and when settled there. And, if necessary, a number of white people must go with them; one or more to superintend their affairs, and others to survey and lay out their lands, build mills and houses, etc. But these must not think of settling there for life; and the blacks are to be left to themselves when they shall be able to conduct their own affairs, and need no further assistance, and be left a free, independent people.
This appears to be the best and only plan to put the blacks among us in the most agreeable situation for themselves, and to render them most useful to their brethren in Africa, by civilizing them, and teaching them how to cultivate their lands, and spreading the knowledge of the Christian religion among them. The whites are so habituated, by education and custom, to look upon and treat the blacks as an inferior class of beings, and they are sunk so low by their situation and the treatment they receive from us, that they never can be raised to an equality with the whites, and enjoy all the liberty and rights to which they have a just claim; or have all the encouragements and motives to make improvements of every kind, which are desirable. But if they were removed to Africa this evil would cease, and they would enjoy all desirable equality and liberty, and live in a climate which is peculiarly suited to their constitution. And they would be under advantages to set an example of industry, and the best manner of cultivating the land, of civil life, of morality and religion, which would tend to gain the attention of the inhabitants of that country, and persuade them to receive instruction and embrace the gospel.
These United States are able to be at the expense of prosecuting such a plan, of which these hints are some of the outlines. And is not this the best way that can be taken to compensate the blacks, both in America and Africa, for the injuries they have received by the slave trade and slavery, and that which righteousness and benevolence must dictate? And even selfishness will be pleased with such a plan as this, and excite to exertions to carry it into effect, when the advantages of it to the public and to individuals are well considered and realized. This will gradually draw off all the blacks in New England, and even in the Middle and Southern States, as fast as they can be set free, by which this nation will be delivered from that which, in the view of every discerning man, is a great calamity, and inconsistent with the good of society, and is now really a great injury to most of the white inhabitants, especially in the Southern States. 
And by the increase and flourishing of such a plantation of free people in Africa, where all the tropical fruits and productions and the articles which we fetch from the West Indies may be raised in great abundance, by proper cultivation, and many other useful things procured, a commerce may take place and be maintained between those settlements and the United States of America, which will be of very great and increasing advantage to both.
And this will have the greatest tendency wholly to abolish the abominable trade in human flesh, and will certainly effect it, if all other attempts prove unsuccessful.
That such a plan is practicable, is evident from the experiment which has lately been made in forming a settlement of blacks at Sierra Leone. Above a thousand blacks were transported from Nova Scotia to that place last year, who, by the assistance of a small number of whites and supplies from England, have formed a town and plantation, which, by the latest accounts, is now in a flourishing condition, the inhabitants living in peace and amity with the neighboring nations, and with a promising prospect of being a great ad- vantage to them, by teaching them to cultivate their lands and civilizing them, and showing them the advantages of peace and of industry, and trade in the productions of their country, and spreading the knowledge of Christianity among them. This will gradually put an end to the slave trade and to slavery in that part of the continent. And from this settlement there is a rational prospect of a commerce in the productions of that climate with Britain, which will be so profitable as more than to compensate the latter for all the expense of forming and carrying it on, and will be greatly advantageous to both nations.
There is reason to believe that a settlement may be made by the blacks now in the United States in some part of Africa, either on the River Sierra Leone or in some other place, which will be as advantageous to those who shall settle there and to the adjacent nations as this which has been mentioned, and with much less expense, and which will be a greater benefit to this nation than that may be to Britain.
Are there not, then, motives sufficient to induce the legislature of this nation to enter upon and prosecute this design, to form a plan and execute it, as wisdom shall direct? And is there not reason to think that it would meet with general approbation? But, if this cannot be, may not this be effected by the societies in these states who are formed with a design to promote the best good of the Africans? Would not this be answering the end of their institution in the best way that can be devised, and in imitation of that which has been formed in Great Britain for the same purpose?
Is there not reason to believe that, if such a plan was well digested and properly laid before the public, and urged, with the reasons which offer, and a company or committee formed to conduct the affair, there might be a sum collected sufficient to carry it into effect?
The general court in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts did, some time ago, make a resolve to the following purpose: That when a place can be found in Africa where the blacks in that state may settle to their advantage, they would furnish them with shipping and provisions sufficient to transport them there, and with arms sufficient to defend them, and fanning utensils sufficient to cultivate their lands. If all the states in the Union, or most of them, would take the same measure, such a design might be soon and easily carried into execution. Nothing appears to be wanting but a proper, most reasonable zeal in so good a cause. 
When the public or any part of the community are taking those measures, or going into that practice, which may issue in ruin, and most certainly will, unless reformed, he who foresees the approaching evil cannot act a benevolent or faithful part unless he gives warning of the danger, and does his utmost to reform and save his fellow-citizens, even though he should hereby incur the displeasure and resentment of a number of individuals. In this view, Crito asks the candid attention of the public to what he has to say on the following interesting and important subject. 
Some, perhaps, will not choose to read any further, but drop this paper with a degree of uneasy disgust, when they are told the subject to which their attention is asked is the African slave trade, which has been practised, and in which numbers in these United States are now actually engaged. So much has been published within a few years past on this subject, describing the fertile country of Africa, and the ease and happiness which the natives of that land enjoy, and might enjoy to a much greater degree, were it not for their own ignorance and folly, and the unhappy influence which the Europeans and Americans have had among them, inducing them to make war upon each other, and by various methods to captivate and kidnap their brethren and neighbors, and sell them into the most abject and perpetual slavery, — and at the same time giving a well-authenticated history of this commerce in the human species, pointing out the injustice, inhumanity, and barbarous cruelty of this trade, from beginning to end, until the poor Africans are fixed in a state of the most cruel bondage, in which, without hope, they linger out a wretched life, and then leave their posterity, if they are so unhappy as to have any, in the same miserable state, — so much has been lately published, I say, on these subjects, that it is needless particularly to discuss them here. It is sufficient to refer the inquisitive to the following books, viz., several Tracts, collected and published by the late Anthony Benezet, of Philadelphia; "A Dialogue concerning the Slavery of the Africans," lately reprinted at New York by order of the society there for promoting the manumission of slaves, and protecting such of them as have been, or may be, liberated; and especially" An Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species, particularly the Africans," by Thomas Clarkson, which was honored with the first prize in the University of Cambridge for the year 1785. If the African slave trade, and the consequent slavery of the negroes in the West Indies and in the United States of America, be an open and gross violation of the rights of mankind, a most unrighteous, inhuman, and cruel practice, which has been the occasion of the death of millions, and of violently forcing millions of others from their dear, native country, and their most tender and desirable connections, and of bringing them to a land of slavery, where they have not a friend to pity and relieve them, but are doomed to cruel bondage, without hope of redress, till kind death shall release them, as is represented, and seems to be abundantly proved, in the above-mentioned publications and many others, a conviction of which is fast spreading among all ranks of men in Europe and America, then the following terrible consequence, which may well make all shudder and tremble who realize it, forces itself upon us, viz., all who have had any hand in this iniquitous business, whether more directly or indirectly, have used their influence to promote it, or have consented to it, or even connived at it, and have not opposed it by all proper exertions of which they have been capable, — all these are, in a greater or less degree, chargeable with the injuries and miseries which millions have suffered, and are suffering, in consequence of this trade, and are guilty of the blood of millions who have lost their lives by this traffic of the human species. Not only the merchants who have been engaged in this trade, and for the sake of gain have sacrificed the liberty and happiness, yea, the lives of millions of their fellow-men, and the captains and men who have been tempted by the love of money to engage in this cruel work, to buy, and sell, and butcher men, and the slaveholders of every description, are guilty of shedding rivers of blood, but all the legislatures who have authorized, encouraged, or even neglected to suppress it to the utmost of their power, and all the individuals in private stations who have in any way aided in this business, consented to it, or have not opposed it to the utmost of their ability, have a share in this guilt. It is, therefore, become a national sin, and a sin of the first magnitude — a sin which righteous Heaven has never suffered to pass unpunished in this world. For the truth of this assertion we may appeal to history, both sacred and profane.
We will leave the inhabitants of Britain and other European nations who have been, and still are, engaged in the slave trade, to answer for themselves, and consider this subject as it more immediately concerns the United States of America. 
Hundreds of thousands of slaves have been imported into these states, many thousands are now in slavery here, and many more thousands have been brought from Africa by the inhabitants of these states, and sold in the West Indies, where slavery is attended with cruelty and horror beyond description. And who can reckon up the numbers who have lost their lives and been really murdered by this trade, or have a full conception of the sufferings and distresses of body and mind which have been the attendants and effects of it? All this blood which has been shed constantly cries to Heaven; and all the bitter sighs, and groans, and tears of these injured, distressed, helpless poor have entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts, and are calling and waiting for the day of vengeance. The inhabitants of Rhode Island, especially those of Newport, have had by far the greater share in this traffic of all these United States. This trade in the human species has been the first wheel of commerce in Newport, on which every other movement in business has chiefly depended. That town has been built up, and flourished in times past, at the expense of the blood, the liberty, and happiness of the poor Africans; and the inhabitants have lived on this, and by it have gotten most of their wealth and riches. What a heavy, dreadful woe hangs over the heads of all those whose hands are defiled by the blood of the Africans, especially the inhabitants of that state, and of that town, who have had a distinguished share in this unrighteous, bloody commerce! All this and more follows as a necessary consequence, which it is presumed none will dispute, on supposition the before-mentioned publications give, in any measure, a just representation of the slave trade and the consequent slavery of the Africans, and unless thousands and millions of all ranks, and of the most disinterested, and many of them men of the best, abilities and character for knowledge, uprightness, and benevolence, and who are under the greatest advantages to know the truth and judge right of this matter, both in Europe and America, — unless all those are grossly deluded. But if all these may be fairly confuted, and the African slave trade, and the consequent treatment of those who are by means of this reduced to slavery, can be justified, and shown to be consistent with justice, humanity, and universal benevolence, then the whole of this consequence will be obviated, and all the supposed guilt of injuring our fellow-men in the highest degree, and of shedding rivers of innocent blood, will be wiped away as a mere phantom, and vanish as the baseless fabric of a night vision. It is earnestly to be desired, therefore, if this be possible, that some able, disinterested advocate for the slave trade, if such a one can be found, would step forth and do it. But if there be no such man, let the interested, and those who are in this traffic, and the slavery of the Africans arise and show it to be just and benevolent, if they can. We will promise you a candid and patient hearing, for we desire to justify you if it were possible. If this can be done to the satisfaction of all, it would remove from our minds a set of painful feelings, which cannot be easily described, and dissipate a gloom which now hangs heavy upon us, in the view of the exceeding depravity, unrighteousness, and cruelty of men who, for a little gain, will deluge millions in slavery and blood, with an unfeeling heart, and their eyes fast shut against the glaring light which condemns their horrid deeds, and in the painful prospect of the dreadful vengeance of Heaven for such daring outrage against our fellow-men, our brethren. But, until this be done, this business must be unavoidably viewed in the most disagreeable, odious, horrible light by us. And we must be suffered to consider, and lay before the public, some of the great aggravations which attend the continuation of this practice by us in these United States.
When the inhabitants of these states found themselves necessarily involved in contentions with Britain in order to continue a free people, and had the distressing prospect of a civil war, they, being assembled in Congress, in October, 1774, did agree and resolve, in the following words: "We will neither import, nor purchase any slave imported, after the first day of December next; after which time we will wholly discontinue the slave trade, and will neither be concerned in it ourselves, nor will we hire our vessels, nor sell our commodities or manufactures, to those who are concerned in it." This reasonable, noble, and important resolution was approved by the people in general, and they adhered to it through the
war, during which time there was much publicly said and done which was at least an implicit and practical declaration of the unreasonableness and injustice of the slave trade and of slavery in general. It was repeatedly declared in Congress, as the language and sentiment of all these states, and by other public bodies of men, "that we hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." "That all men are born equally free and independent, and have certain natural, inherent, and unalienable rights, among which are, the defending and enjoying life and liberty, acquiring, possessing, and protecting property, and pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety. By the immutable laws of nature, all men are entitled to life and liberty," etc. The Africans, and the blacks in servitude among us, were really as much included in these assertions as ourselves, and their right, unalienable right to liberty, and to procure and possess property, is as much asserted as ours, if they be men; and if we have not allowed them to enjoy these unalienable rights, but violently deprived them of liberty and property, and still taking as far as in our power all liberty and property from the nations in Africa, we are guilty of a ridiculous, wicked contradiction and inconsistence, and practically authorize any nation or people, who have power to do it, to make us their slaves. The whole of our war with Britain was a contest for liberty, by which we, when brought to the severest test, practically adhered to the above assertions, so far as they concerned ourselves at least; and we declared in words and actions that we chose rather to die than to be slaves, or have our liberty and property taken from us. We viewed the British in an odious and contemptible light, purely because they were attempting to deprive us by violence in some measure of those our unalienable rights; but if at the same time, or since, we have taken or withheld these same rights from the Africans or any of our fellow-men, we have justified the inhabitants of Britain in all they have done against us, and declared that all the blood which has been shed in consequence of our opposition to them is chargeable on us. If we do not allow this, and abide by the above declarations, we charge ourselves with the guilt of all the blood which has been shed by means of the slave trade, and of an unprovoked and most injurious conduct in depriving innumerable Africans of their just, unalienable rights, in violently taking and withholding from them all liberty and property, holding them as our own property, and buying and selling them as we do our horses and cattle, reducing them to the most vile, humiliating, and painful situation. This whole contest, it must be again observed, was suited to bring and keep in our view, and impress on our minds, a deep and lasting sense of the worth of liberty, and the unrighteousness of taking it from any man, and, consequently, of our unrighteousness and cruelty towards the Africans. If it were known that the wise Governor of the world had determined to take some method to convince us of the injustice of the slave trade and of the slavery of the Africans, and manifest his displeasure with us for it, and use means suited to reform us, could we conceive of any measures which might be better suited to answer this end than those which have actually taken place in this war, considered in all the circumstances of it? It would be thought impossible that every one who then was, or had been, active in reducing the Africans to the abject and suffering state in which they are in the West Indies, and even among us, should not reflect upon it with self-condemnation, regret, and horror, had not experiment proved the contrary. And while we execrated the British for taking our men and ordering them to be transported to the East Indies, and for crowding so many of our people into prisons and prison ships, — where they died by thousands, without any relief or pity from them, — was it possible for us not to reflect upon our treatment of the Africans, in transporting so many thousands of them from their native country to a land of slavery, while multitudes, being crowded and shackled in our ships, have died on their passage, without one to help or pity them? Could any avoid seeing the righteous hand of God stretched out against us, and retaliating our unrighteous, cruel treatment of them in a way suited to strike conviction into our minds of our guilt, and of the righteous displeasure of Heaven with us for these horrid deeds which had been done by us? Is it possible that the Americans should, after all this, and in the face of this light and conviction, and after they had obtained liberty and independence for themselves, continue to hold hundreds of thousands of their fellow-men in the most abject slavery? — and not only so, but, notwithstanding their resolutions and declarations, renew and carry on the slave trade, and from year to year convey thousands of their fellow-men from their native country to a state of most severe and perpetual bondage? This would have been thought impossible, was it not known to be true in fact; and who can describe the aggravated guilt which the Americans have brought upon themselves by this? If this was a Heaven-daring crime of the first magnitude before the war with Britain, how much more criminal must we be now, when, instead of regarding the admonitions of Heaven and the light and conviction set before us, and repenting and reforming, we persist in this cruel practice! What name shall be given to their daring presumption and hardiness, who, from a thirst for gold, have renewed this trade in slaves, in the bodies and souls of men, and of those whom they employ in this inhuman, horrid business?
And is not Heaven frowning upon us now? We are as yet disappointed in our expectations of peace, prosperity, and happiness, in consequence of liberty and independence. Instead of rising to honor, dignity, and respect among the nations, we have suddenly sunk into disgrace and contempt. Our trade labors under great disadvantages, and is coming to nothing. We have lost our money, having parted with the greatest part of it, not to pay our debts, but for foreign luxuries or unnecessaries, and those things which might have been manufactured among ourselves. Our public and private debts are not paid, but are increasing. A spirit of discontent and murmuring, and jealousy of our rulers, and complaining of them, has spread among us, and in some places insurrections, and open, violent opposition to government, have taken place, which have proceeded to plunder and shedding blood. Divisions and contentions have taken place among ourselves, and seem to be hastening to universal confusion and anarchy. There is a general complaint of evil times; and where is the family or man to be found which does not sensibly share in the general calamity, and is not involved in some peculiar difficulty?
The British are so far from being at peace with us, that they have done much to bring on the before-mentioned evils. They are attempting to ruin our trade as much as is in their power, and refuse to deliver up to us the western posts, which we claim, and put on a hostile appearance, which may soon issue in an open war. The Indians are making war upon us, and kill and captivate the inhabitants of the western settlements, and threaten to be yet a more dreadful scourge to us. The Algerines, without any provocation, are captivating our ships, and carry our men into slavery; and we have no power to redeem them, or to put a stop to their further depredations. The State of Rhode Island, in particular, — which, as has been shown, has had a distinguished hand in the slave trade, — is fallen into a disagreeable and very calamitous situation. Great animosities and contentions with each other have arisen. They are divided into parties, and biting and devouring one another. Public injustice is established by law. They have lost their credit abroad, and are become the subject of ridicule, reproach, and contempt. Their trade and all business are discouraged, and almost ruined; and Newport, the metropolis, is fast going to poverty and inevitable ruin, unless some unforeseen event should take place to prevent it . Wherefore is all this come upon us so suddenly, and in such a remarkable and unexpected manner? Is not the hand of God very visibly stretched out against us? And must there not some Achan be found with us, which has provoked the Most High to bring all this evil upon us, after he had wrought for us and delivered us in such a remarkable manner, and which must be put away before we can reasonably expect to prosper? And is not the renewal of the slave trade, and our continuing to hold so many thousands of our fellow-men in slavery, one principal ground of the divine displeasure? Surely none can doubt of this who view it in the light in which it has been represented above. Other sins and follies have been the means of the evils which are come upon us, such as idleness, intemperance, luxury, and extravagance, in a variety of ways, a neglect to encourage and carry on manufactories, and discourage the importation of unnecessary foreign articles, and opposition to the imposts proposed by Congress, etc. But may not this folly and infatuation itself be justly considered as a judgment which has come upon us, as the just consequence of our persisting in this aggravated, capital, and horrid crime? If this trade and the slavery of the Africans can be vindicated, and proved to be consistent with ourselves, just, and laudable, we again declare we wish to see it done. But if this cannot be done, — and we must be allowed at present to be confident it cannot, — then there is no other hopeful way to escape yet greater evils but by repentance and reformation. Of what importance, then, is it that all ranks and orders of men among us should turn their attention to this matter, and repent, and do works meet for repentance, by reforming and exerting themselves in their several places, and, according to their advantages and abilities, entirely to suppress this evil practice! Is it not to be wished that the convention of these states, now sitting at Philadelphia, may take this matter into serious consideration, and at least keep it in view, while they are forming a system of government, that the supreme power of these states may be able effectually to interpose in this affair? If the above representation be in any way agreeable to the truth, in vain are the wisest counsels and the utmost exertions to extricate ourselves from present evils, or avoid greater, unless the slave trade, and all the attendants of it, be condemned and suppressed. If we persist in thus transgressing the laws of Heaven, and obstinately refuse to do unto these our brethren as we would all men should do unto us, we cannot prosper. It has been, with justice, publicly lamented that Congress has not power to redeem those of our brethren who have fallen into the hands of the Algerines, and are reduced to slavery by them, and as an intolerable evil to have them neglected and left in wretched circumstances for so long a time. But why do we "strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel"? Why should we be so stupid and partial as to turn all our attention to these few sufferers, and wholly overlook the sufferings of so many thousands among us, and of the thousands who are brought from their dear native country and all their relations, and fixed in perpetual slavery, by a set of pirates and banditti from among ourselves, as hardened against the groans and sufferings of their fellow-men, as unjust and cruel, as the most abandoned among the Algerines?
In the name of reason and true benevolence, it is asked why the latter, which is before our eyes, and an evil incomparably greater than the former, is wholly overlooked as not worthy of any regard, and the former fixed upon as a most affecting, intolerable instance of suffering, — which, at the same time, may be considered as a small degree of retaliation for our enslaving the Africans, and is suited to remind us of it, and to open our eyes to see, and make us feel our unrighteousness and cruelty towards them, and our gross inconsistency and self-contradiction in condemning these Algerines, the inhabitants of Africa, — and at the same time not condemning ourselves, who are infinitely more criminal, but by our conduct are really justifying them? Had we any supreme legislature in these states, could they not easily restrain all the subjects from being concerned in the slave trade? And would they not bring the guilt of it on themselves should they not do it? And why have not the several legislatures in these United States done it? Why do they tolerate and connive at it while it is carried on, at least in some states, in their sight? Is it because it is thought to be the most profitable trade of any now carried on, and they are unwilling to prevent the introduction of the money which is brought into some of these states by this means? Some have suspected this to be the truth; but we will not admit it. Is it, then, because they do not attend sufficiently to the matter, and are not sensible of the unrighteousness and cruelty of the trade? or is it because they judge it not in their power, and that they have no right and authority to interpose in this affair?
This has been asserted by some, whether with reason or not it may be worth while seriously to consider. The Quakers, who have done more than any others to acquit themselves of the guilt of the slave trade, and have discovered more humanity and regard to the laws of Christ, in this instance, than any other denomination of Christians, (to the praise of the former and the shame of the latter it must be spoken,) they have, among their many other exertions in opposition to this trade, lately applied to the General Assembly of the State of Rhode Island, praying them to devise some way to put a stop to the slave trade which is carried on by a number of persons in that state, which petition is now under consideration; and it is said they determine to petition all the legislatures in these United States to do the same. It is hoped they will not re- fuse to do any thing they have a right and power to do utterly to abolish this iniquity in these states, but they should fasten the guilt of it more than ever on themselves and on their constituents. It is said by some that this trade does not properly come under the cognizance of any legislature in these states, as they cannot make laws to bind their subjects when out of the limits of their jurisdiction, or punish them for what they do in Africa or the West Indies, especially as the slave trade is there tolerated and protected by law, custom, and general consent. This, perhaps, is the only objection that has been, or can be, offered against the legislatures of these states interposing to suppress this trade. It therefore deserves a particular examination.
It is granted by all, that common pirates may be punished by the laws of any state, when apprehended, wherever or in whatever part of the world their crimes were committed. There is good reason for this, it will be said, because these men are guilty of intolerable crimes, which are reprobated by all nations, and have really turned enemies to mankind, and, therefore, ought to be punished wherever they can be apprehended. To this it may be replied, that the slave trader who buys and sells his fellow-men, by which traffic he is the means of the death of many, and of reducing others to the most miserable bond- age during life, is as really an enemy to mankind as the pirate, and violates common law, which is, or ought to be, the law of all nations, and is guilty of crimes of greater magnitude, exercises more inhumanity and cruelty, sheds more blood, and plunders more, and commits greater outrages against his fellow-men than most of those who are called pirates. In short, if any men deserve the name of pirates, these ought to be considered in the first and highest class of them; and if there be no law against this commerce of the human species in Africa, or in Britain and in the West India islands, and this trade is tolerated in all these places, and elsewhere, does this make the practice less evil in itself, or more tolerable? Is this any reason why it should be tolerated by the legislatures in America? If it was the custom of those who carry on the slave trade to put to death one half of the men who sail in their ships when they arrive at the coast of Africa, and sell the other half of them, and this were tolerated there, and these traders found means to entice great numbers of our men to sail with them to Africa every year, by which thousands of our people were murdered or enslaved, would it be thought our legislatures had no right to restrain them, and at least banish every sea captain who was guilty of this, because the crime is not committed where they have jurisdiction, and where such cruelty and murder are tolerated, and not considered as crimes?
For, in such an instance, the crime would not consist in shipping men on board their vessels, but in their treatment of them after they arrived at Africa. Could there be found a man, not interested in such a business, who would make this objection, or a legislature who would think it of the least weight? Surely no. But it would be of as much weight in the case proposed as in that under consideration. The Algerines have taken a number of Americans, and sold them into slavery. Have we not a right, ought we not, had we power, to oblige them to deliver them up, and set them at liberty, and lay such restraints upon them as to put it beyond their power to perpetuate such crimes in future? Would the plea of their being out of the limits of our jurisdiction be a good reason to suffer them to go on in their injuries without restraint? These American states ought to vindicate the rights of mankind, and promote their liberty and happiness, to the utmost of their power. Every state ought to pity the ignorance, weakness, and wickedness of the Africans, and afford them all the relief, protection, and assistance in their power, and do their utmost to restrain those of their subjects from hurting them who otherwise would take advantage of their distance from us, and of their ignorance and weakness. How, then, can they sit still, and suffer their subjects to carry on this horrible commerce, big with so much cruelty and murder, and be guiltless? On the whole, will it not appear to every impartial, benevolent man, who well attends to the matter, that if our legislatures refuse to interpose in this case, and will not at least outlaw those who are concerned in this trade and persist in it, it must be owing either to their not attending to and realizing the magnitude of the crime and the evil involved in this commerce, or to some less excusable cause, if such there may be?
But if the legislature should neglect to do any thing which it is thought they might and ought to do, will this excuse the people at large? Might they not, if they were alarmed and engaged as they ought to be, if the above representation be in any measure just, do that which would effectually suppress among us this hideous, threatening evil? When our contention with Britain was coming on, the man who openly appeared active on their side was abandoned as unworthy the rights and privileges of society, and in many instances his neighbors withdrew all connection and commerce with him; and this was justified as a proper and important measure. And are not these men, who are carrying on this trade and enslaving and destroying their fellow-men, without any provocation from them, and hereby bringing guilt on these states and the awful judgment of Heaven, — are they not unworthy the privileges of freemen? Ought they not to be considered as enemies to mankind, and murderers of their brethren for the sake of gold, and real pests and plagues to society? And would not treating them as such effectually reform them, or banish them from among us? It has been observed, that when the war with Britain was coming on, we resolved not only that we would wholly discontinue the slave trade ourselves, but that we would not "hire our vessels, nor sell our commodities or manufactures, to those who are concerned in it." If this resolution was reasonable and important then, it is as much, and more so, now; and this, fully put into practice, would put an effectual stop to it.
Shall we not, then, by this neglect, bring the guilt of this trade and the blood of the Africans on our own heads and on our children? And how dreadful will be the consequence, who can tell? The warning is given, and that is all that can be done by CRITO.
October I3th, 1787.
