A. You well observed that the apostles did not intermeddle with the affair of slavery so as to condemn masters for holding their slaves, or tell the servants their masters had no right to keep them in bondage, but ought to free them. I wish all were as wise and prudent now, especially ministers of the gospel; but all are not so. Many make such a clamor about holding our negroes in bondage, and some ministers have of late said so much in public about freeing our slaves, and have so inveighed against the African slave trade, and even keeping our blacks in slavery, that many of the negroes are become very uneasy, and are much more engaged to obtain their liberty than they used to be.
I think if any thing be said on this subject it should be in private; and not a word of this kind should be lisped in the hearing of our servants, much less ought ministers to say any thing about it in public, lest the blacks should all take it into their heads that they are treated hardly, and never be easy till they are set at liberty.
B. It has been observed, there were reasons peculiar to the state of things at that time, why the apostles should not be so particular on this head; which reasons do not take place now. The slavery that now takes place is in a Christian land, and without the express sanction of civil government; and it is all of the same kind and from one original, which is most notoriously unjust, and if it be unrighteous in one instance, it is so in almost every instance; and the unrighteousness of it is most apparent, and most masters have no color of claim to hold their servants in bondage; and this is become a general and crying sin, for which we are under the awful frowns of Heaven. These things, which make the case so different from the slavery which took place in the apostles' days, may be a good reason of a different conduct, and make it duty to oppose and bear testimony, both in public and more privately, against this evil practice, which is so evidently injurious to individuals, and threatens our ruin as a people.
As to making servants uneasy, and desirous of liberty, I would observe, that most of them do not want to be informed that they are greatly injured and oppressed; that they are reduced to a state of slavery without the least color of justice. They have sense and discerning enough to be sensible of this, without being told; and they think much of it almost every day, though they are obliged to keep it to themselves, having none to pity them, or so much as hear their complaints. They have a thousand times more discerning and sensibility in this case than their masters, or most others; and their aversion to slavery, and desires of liberty, are inextinguishable. Therefore, their hearing it asserted that they ought to be set at liberty gives them no new light and conviction, except it be, that he who asserts it has some discerning of what they have long known and most sensibly felt, and has courage enough to assert that in their favor which they have long felt the truth of, but dared not so much as lisp it out . But if by this means any of your servants should be more fully convinced of their right to liberty, and the injustice done them in making them slaves, will this be such a dreadful evil? Would you desire they should be held in ignorance, that you may exercise your tyranny without opposition or trouble from any quarter? As reasonably might Pharaoh be angry, and complain of Moses and Aaron for saying a word to those whom he had reduced to slavery about their cruel bondage and their obtaining their liberty.
It has always been the way of tyrants to take great pains to keep their vassals in ignorance, especially to hide from them the tyranny and oppression of which they are the subjects; and for this reason they are enemies to the liberty of the press, and are greatly provoked when their conduct is set in a true light before the public, and the unrighteousness they practice properly exposed. The complaint we are now considering seems to be of the same kind with this, and well becomes all those petty tyrants who have slaves in their possession, which they are conscious they cannot vindicate, but the unrighteousness will be detected if free inquiry and freedom of speech cannot be suppressed; and this complaint is of the same kind with the conduct of the masters of slaves in the West Indies in opposing their being taught any thing of Christianity, because they know every gleam of this light carries a discovery of the unrighteousness of the treatment they receive.
The present situation of our public affairs and our struggle for liberty, and the abundant conversation this occasions in all companies, while the poor negroes look on and hear what an aversion we have to slavery and how much liberty is prized, they often hearing it declared publicly and in private, as the voice of all, that slavery is more to be dreaded than death, and we are resolved to live free or die, etc.; this, I say, necessarily leads them to attend to their own wretched situation more than otherwise they could. They see themselves deprived of all liberty and property, and their children after them, to the latest posterity, subject to the will of those who appear to have no feeling for their misery, and are guilty of many instances of hard-heartedness and cruelty towards them, while they think themselves very kind; and therefore, to make the least complaint, would be deemed the height of arrogance and abuse; and often if they have a comparatively good master now, with constant dread they see a young one growing up, who bids fair to rule over them, or their children, with rigor.
They see the slavery the Americans dread as worse than death is lighter than a feather compared to their heavy doom, and may be called liberty and happiness when contrasted with the most abject slavery and unutterable wretchedness to which they are subjected; and in this dark and dreadful situation they look round and find no help — no pity — no hope! And when they observe all this cry and struggle for liberty for ourselves and children, and see themselves and their children wholly overlooked by us, and behold the sons of liberty oppressing and tyrannizing over many thousands of poor blacks who have as good a claim to liberty as themselves, they are shocked with the glaring inconsistence, and wonder they themselves do not see it. You must not, therefore, lay it to the few who are pleading the cause of these friendless, distressed poor, that they are more uneasy than they used to be in a sense of their wretched state and from a desire of liberty: there is a more mighty and irresistible cause than this, viz., all that passes before them in our public struggle for liberty.
And why should the ministers of the gospel hold their peace and not testify against this great and public iniquity, which we have reason to think is one great cause of the public calamities we are now under? How can they refuse to plead the cause of these oppressed poor against the cruel oppressor? They are commanded to lift up their voice, and cry aloud, and show the people their sins. Have we not reason to fear many of them have offended Heaven by their silence, through fear of the masters, who stand ready to make war against any one who attempts to deprive them of their slaves, or because they themselves have slaves which they are not willing to give up?
Might they not fully expose this iniquity, and bear a constant testimony against it, in such a manner as would have no tendency to influence our servants to behave ill in any respect, by giving them, at the same time, proper cautions and directions?
A. It is impossible to free all our negroes, especially at once and in present circumstances, without injuring them, at least many of them, and the public to a great degree. Why, then, is this urged so vehemently now? I think this proceeds from a zeal not according to knowledge.
B. If it be not a sin, an open, flagrant violation of all the rules of justice and humanity, to hold these slaves in bondage, it is indeed folly to put ourselves to any trouble and expense in order to free them. But if the contrary be true, if it be a sin of a crimson dye, which is most particularly pointed out by the public calamities which have come upon us, from which we have no reason to expect deliverance till we put away the evil of our doings, this reformation cannot be urged with too much zeal, nor attempted too soon, whatever difficulties are in the way. The more and greater these are, the more zealous and active should we be in removing them. You had need
to take care, lest from selfish motives and a backwardness to give up what you unrighteously retain, you are joining with the slothful man to cry, while there is no insurmountable difficulty but that which lies in your own heart.
No wonder there are many and great difficulties in reforming an evil practice of this kind, which has got such deep root by length of time and is become so common. But it does not yet appear that they cannot be removed by the united wisdom and strength of the American colonies, without any injury to the slaves or disadvantage to the public. Yea, the contrary is most certain, as the slaves cannot be put into a more wretched situation, ourselves being judges, and the community cannot take a more likely step to escape ruin, and obtain the smiles and protection of Heaven. This matter ought, doubtless, to be attended to by the general assemblies, and continental and provincial congresses; and if they were as much united and engaged in devising ways and means to set at liberty these injured slaves as they are to defend themselves from tyranny, it would soon be effected. There were, without doubt, many difficulties and impediments in the way of the Jews liberating those of their brethren they had brought into bondage in the days of Jeremiah. But when they were besieged by the Chaldeans, and this their sin was laid before them, and they were threatened with desolation if they did not reform, they broke through every difficulty, and set their servants at liberty.
And how great must have been the impediments, how many the seeming unanswerable objections against reforming that gross violation of the divine command in Ezra's time, by their marrying strange wives, of which so many of the Jews were guilty, and the hand of the princes and rulers had been chief in this trespass! Yet the pious zeal of Ezra, and those who joined with him, and their wisdom and indefatigable efforts, conquered every obstacle and brought them to a thorough reformation. Would not the like zeal, wisdom, and resolution, think you, soon produce a reformation of this much greater abomination, by finding out an effectual method to put away all our slaves? Surely we have no reason to conclude it cannot be done till we see a suitable zeal and resolution among all orders of men, and answerable attempts are thoroughly made.
Let this iniquity be viewed in its true magnitude, and in the shocking light in which it has been set in this conversation; let the wretched case of the poor blacks be considered with proper pity and benevolence, together with the probably dreadful consequence to this land of retaining them in bondage, and all objections against liberating them would vanish. The mountains that are now raised up in the imagination of many would become a plain, and every difficulty surmounted.
Pharaoh and the Egyptians could not bear to think of letting the Hebrews go out free from the bondage to which they had reduced them, and it may be presumed they had as many weighty objections against it as can be thought of against freeing the slaves among us. Yet they were at length brought to drop them all, and willing to send them out free, and to be ready to part with any thing they had in order to promote it.*
If many thousands of our children were slaves in Algiers, or any parts of the Turkish dominions, and there were but few families in the American colonies that had not some child or near relation in that sad state, without any hope of freedom to them or their children unless there were some very extraordinary exertion of the colonies to effect it, how would the attention of all the country be turned to it! How greatly should we be affected with it! Would it not become the chief topic of conversation? Would any cost or labor be spared, or any difficulty or hazard be too great to go through, in order to obtain their freedom? If there were no greater difficulties than there are in the case before us, yea, if they were ten times greater, would they not be soon surmounted as very inconsiderable? I know you, sir, and every one else, must answer in the affirmative without hesitation. And why are we not as much affected with the slavery of the many thousands of blacks among ourselves whose miserable state is before our eyes? And why should we not be as much engaged to relieve them? The reason is obvious. It is because they are negroes, and fit for nothing but slaves, and we have been used to look on them in a mean, contemptible light, and our education has filled us with strong prejudices against them, and led us to consider them, not as our brethren, or in any degree on a level with us, but as quite another species of animals, made only to serve us and our children, and as happy in bondage as in any other state. This has banished all attention to the injustice that is done them, and any proper sense of their misery or the exercise of benevolence towards them. If we could only divest ourselves of these strong prejudices which have insensibly fixed on our minds, and consider them as by nature and by right on a level with our brethren and children, and those of our neighbors, and that benevolence which loves our neighbor as ourselves, and is agreeable to truth and righteousness, we should begin to feel towards them, in some measure at least, as we should towards our children and neighbors in the case above supposed, and be as much engaged for their relief.
If parents have a son pressed on board a king's ship, how greatly are they affected with it! They are filled with grief and distress, and will cheerfully be at almost any cost and pains to procure his liberty; and we wonder not at it, but think their exercises and engagedness for his deliverance very just, and stand ready to condemn him who has no feeling for them and their son, and is not ready to afford all the assistance in his power in order to recover him. At the same time we behold vast numbers of blacks among us, torn from their native country and all their relations, not to serve on board a man-of-war for a few years, but to be abject, despised slaves for life, and their children after them, and yet have not the least feelings for them or desire of their freedom. These very parents, perhaps, have a number of negro slaves on whom they have not the least pity, and stand ready highly to resent it if any one espouses their cause so much as to propose they should be set at liberty. What reason for this partiality? Ought this so to be? An impartial person, who is not under the prejudices of interest, education, and custom, is shocked with it beyond all expression. The poor negroes have sense enough to see and feel it, but have no friend to speak a word for them, none to whom they may complain.
It has been observed, that if the general assemblies of these American colonies would take this matter in hand in earnest, with a concern and resolution answerable to its real importance, and the whole community were properly disposed and engaged, the freedom of the slaves among us might soon be effected without injury to the public or those who shall be set at liberty, but greatly to the advantage of both. But if this should be neglected, will it excuse individuals who have slaves in their continuing to hold them in bondage? I think not. If you, sir, had as many children in slavery at Algiers as you have African slaves in your house, would you take no pains and devise no method to obtain their liberty till the public should make some provision for the emancipation of all slaves there? If any opportunity should present to obtain their liberty, would you not greedily embrace it, though at much hazard and expense? And if their master should refuse to let them go free till there was a general emancipation of the Christian slaves in that country, would you justify him as acting a proper, humane, and benevolent part? I trow not.
How then can you excuse yourself, and deliver your own soul, while you have no compassion for these black children in your house, and refuse to break the yoke, the galling yoke, from off their necks, because your neighbors will not be so just and humane to theirs?
Some masters say they will give up their slaves if all masters will do the same, but seem to think they are excused from setting theirs free so long as there is not a general manumission. What has just been observed is suited, I think, to show the insufficiency of this excuse. Besides, if you desire to have all our slaves freed, why do you not set an example by liberating your own? This might influence others to do the same, and then you might with a good grace plead the cause of these poor Africans; whereas, while you retain your own slaves your mouth is stopped, and your example serves to strengthen others, and keep them in countenance, while they practise this abominable oppression.
A. My servants have cost me a great deal of money, and it is not reasonable I should lose all that. If the public will indemnify me and pay me what my servants are worth, I am willing to free them, and none can reasonably desire to do it on any other consideration.
B. If your neighbor buys a horse, or any beast, of a thief who stole it from you, while he had no thought that it was stolen, would you not think you had a right to demand your horse of your neighbor, and pronounce him very unjust if he should refuse to deliver him to you till he had received the whole sum he had given for him? And have not your servants as great a right to themselves, to their liberty, as you have to your stolen horse? They have been stolen and sold, and you have bought them, in your own wrong, when you had much more reason to think they were stolen than he who bought your horse had to mistrust he was trading with a and been sold ten times, you think you have a right to demand and take him, in whose soever hand you find him, without refunding a farthing of what he cost him; and yet, though your negroes can prove their right to themselves, and constantly make a demand upon you to deliver them up, you refuse till they pay the full price you gave for them, because through many hands, the civil law will not oblige you to do it. "Thou hypocrite!"
Had you not been amazingly inconsiderate and stupid, you would have concluded these men were stolen, and known that no man had a right to sell them, or you to buy them. And must they be forever deprived of their right, which is worth more to them than all you possess, because you have been so foolish and wicked as to buy them, and no one appears to prevent your losing by the bargain? He who refuses to free his negroes, that he may save his money and lay it up for his children, and retains his slaves for them to tyrannize over, leaves them but a miserable inheritance — infinitely worse than nothing.
Besides, if indifferent persons were to judge, it would doubtless be found that many of your servants, if not all, have much more than earned what they cost you, — some of them double and treble, yea, ten times as much, — and, in this view, you ought to let them go out free, and not send them away empty, but furnish them liberally out of your store, agreeably to the divine command, they having a much better right to part of your estate than your children, and, it may be, much more likely to make a good improvement of it.
A. You speak of servants earning so much; but, for my part, I think not so much of this. Mine have never been much profit to me, and most of them do not pay for their victuals and clothes, but are constantly running in debt.
B. The master is not a proper judge in this case. How common is it for men who hire others to complain that the laborers do not earn the wages they give, and that they are continually losing by all the labor they hire. And, if it were wholly left to him who hires what wages he should give the laborer, and he was accountable to none, how soon would his hire be reduced to little or nothing. The lordly, selfish employer would soon find out that his laborers hardly earned the food he was obliged to find them. Let your uninterested, judicious neighbors judge between you and your servants in this matter, and we will give credit to their verdict. And surely you have no reason to expect we will rely on yours, as you seem not really to believe it yourself, since it looks like a contradiction to your own declaration and practice; for you have been speaking of your servants as of as much worth to you at least as their first cost, and represented it as giving up your interest if you should free them without a compensation; whereas, if what you now say be true, you will lose nothing by freeing them immediately, but rather get rid of a burden now on your hands. And if this be true, why do you not free them without delay? Your holding them in slavery is a practical contradiction to what you have now suggested. I grant, what is evident to all the discerning who attend to it, that the introduction of such a number of slaves among us is a public detriment — an injury to the commonwealth; and, therefore, in this view, the practice ought by all means to be discouraged and abolished by our legislators. This, however, is consistent with individuals getting estates by the labor of their slaves; and that they are, in fact, in many instances very profitable to their owners, none can deny. And if this was not so, I should be very certain of obtaining what I am pleading for, even a general manumission.
A. You have repeatedly spoke of our slaves being hardly treated and abused. There may, perhaps, be some instances of this among us; but I believe they are generally treated very well, and many of them much better than they deserve. My servants, I am sure, have no reason to complain; they live as well as I do myself, and, in many respects, much better.
B. We will take it for granted, for once, that all you have said is true, and that your slaves are treated as well as they can be while they are held in a state of slavery. But will this atone for your making them your slaves, and taking from them that which is better to them than not only the best living, but all the riches on earth, and is as much to be prized as life itself — their liberty? As well, yea, with much more reason, may a highway robber tell a gentleman, from whom he has taken all his money, he has no reason to complain, since he had spared his life which was at his mercy, nor had wounded him or stripped him of his clothes, and go away pleased with the thought that he had treated him with great kindness and generosity.
If a ruffian should seize, ravish, and carry off a young virgin from all her relations and friends into some lonely cave in the wilderness, and when he got full possession of her there should treat her with great kindness, providing for her every necessary and comfort she could have in that situation; and when he was told of his violence and cruelty, and urged to restore her to her former liberty, he should refuse to release her, and, to justify himself, allege his kind treatment of her, that she had all the comforts of life, and lived better than himself, — would not this be so far from justifying him in the sight of the world, or being the least excuse for his barbarous treatment of her, that his offering it as such would be considered as a striking evidence of his stupidity, and that he was an unfeeling, inhuman wretch? Whether such an instance is in any measure applicable to the case before us, I leave you to judge.
But I must now ask leave to take back what was just now granted, and observe that you are not a proper judge of your treatment of your slaves, and that you may think you treat them very well, in some instances at least, if not in a constant way; they justly think themselves used very hardly, being really subjected to many hardships which you would very sensibly feel and resent if you were in their place, or should see one of your children a slave in Algiers treated so by his master. There are but few masters of slaves, I believe, who do not use them in a hard, unreasonable manner, in some instances at least, and most do so in a constant Way; so that an impartial, attentive bystander will be shocked with it, while the master is wholly insensible of any wrong. They who from us have visited the West Indies, have beheld how servants are used by their masters there with a degree of horror, and pronounced them very unreasonable and barbarous; while the master, and perhaps his other domesties, have thought they were used well, being accustomed to such usage and never once reflecting that these blacks were in any sense on a level with themselves, or that they have the least right to the treatment white people may reasonably expect of one another, and being habituated to view these slaves more beneath themselves than the very beasts really are. And are we not most of us educated in these prejudices, and led to view the slaves among us in such a mean, despicable light, as not to be sensible of the abuses they suffer, when if we or our children should receive such treatment from any of our fellow-men it would appear terrible in our sight? The Turks are by education and custom taught to view the Christian slaves among them so much beneath themselves and in such an odious light, that while they are treating our brethren and children, we being judges, in the most unreasonable and cruel manner, they have not one thought that they injure them in the least degree.
Are you sure your slaves have a sufficiency of good food in season, and that they never want for comfortable clothing and bedding? Do you take great care to deal as well by them in these things as you would wish others would treat your own children were they slaves in a strange land? If your servants complain, are you ready to attend to them? Or do you in such cases frown upon them, or do something worse, so as to discourage their ever applying to you whatever they may suffer, having learned that this would only be making bad worse? Do you never fly into a passion and deal with them in great anger, deciding matters respecting them, and threatening them, and giving sentence concerning them, from which they have no appeal, and perhaps proceed to correct them, when to a calm bystander you appear more fit to be confined in Bedlam than to have the sovereign, uncontrollable dominion over your brethren as the sole lawgiver, judge, and executioner? Do not even your children domineer over your slaves? Must they not often be at the beck of an ungoverned, peevish child in the family; and if they do not run at his or her call, and are not all submission and obedience, must they not expect the frowns of their masters, if not the whip?
If none of these things, my good sir, take place in your family, have we not reason to think you almost a singular instance? How common are things of this kind, or worse, taking place between masters and their slaves? In how few instances, if in any, are slaves treated as the masters would wish to have their own children treated in like circumstances? How few are fit to be masters; to have the sovereign dominion over a number of their fellow-men, being his property, and wholly at his disposal, who must abide his sentence and orders, however unreasonable, without any possibility of relief?
A. I believe my slaves are so far from thinking themselves abused, or being in the least uneasy in a state of slavery, that they have no desire to be made free; and if their freedom were offered to them, they would refuse to accept it.
B. I must take leave to call this in question, sir; and I think you believe it in contradiction to all reason and the strongest feelings of human nature, till they have declared it themselves, having had opportunity for due deliberation, and being in circumstances to act freely, without the least constraint or fear.
There are many masters (if we believe what they say) who please themselves with this fond opinion of their goodness to their slaves, and their choice of a state of slavery in preference to freedom, without the least foundation, and while the contrary is known to be true by all who are acquainted with their slaves. If they really believe this, they by it only discover great insensibility and want of proper reflection. They have not so much as put themselves in the place of their slaves, so as properly and with due sensibility to consult what would be their own feelings on such a supposition. Have they themselves lost all desire of freedom? Are they destitute of all taste of the sweets of it, and have they no aversion to slavery for themselves and children? If they have these feelings, what reason have they to conclude their servants have not?
But it seems most of those masters do not fully believe what they so often say on this head, for they have never made the trial, nor can they be persuaded to do it. Let them offer freedom to their servants and give them opportunity to choose for themselves without being under the most distant constraint; and if they then deliberately choose to continue their slaves, the matter will be fairly decided, and they may continue to possess them with a good conscience. But this will give them no right to make slaves of their children, even if the parents themselves should expressly consent to it; for the parent can have no right to sell the liberty of his children. Slaves are generally under such disadvantages and restraints, that however much they desire liberty they dare not so much as mention it to their masters; and if their master should order them into his presence and ask them whether they had a desire to be made free, many would not dare to declare their choice lest it should offend him, and instead of obtaining their freedom bring themselves into a more evil case than they were in before, as the children of Israel did by desiring Pharaoh to free them.
In this case such precaution ought to be taken as to give the slaves proper assurance that they may without any danger to themselves declare their choice of freedom, and that it shall be done to them according to their choice.
A. If slaves in general were made free, they would soon be in a worse state than that in which they now are. Many of them know not how to contrive for themselves so as to get a living, but must soon be maintained by their former masters or some others; and others would make themselves wretched, and become a great trouble to their neighbors and an injury to the public, by their unrestrained vices. This would doubtless be the case with most of mine were they set free, and some of them are by no means able to maintain themselves.
B. I confess this objection, at first view, seems to have some weight in it; but let us examine it, and see if it be sufficient to hold so many thousands in slavery, and their children after them, to the end of the world. Would you have all the white people, who are given to hurtful vices or are unwilling or unable to maintain themselves, made slaves, and their children after them, and be bought and sold for life like cattle in the market? Would you willingly give up your own children to this, to be slaves forever to any one who should be willing and able to purchase them, if they were as vicious or helpless as you suppose many of the blacks would be if set at liberty? I am sure you will not answer in the affirmative; and by answering in the negative, as I know you must, you will entirely remove the reason you have now offered for holding the blacks in this slavery, till you can show why the latter should be treated so very differently from the former, which I am confident you will not attempt.
A state of slavery has a mighty tendency to sink and contract the minds of men, and prevent their making improvements in useful knowledge of every kind. It sinks the mind down in darkness and despair; it takes off encouragements to activity and to make improvements, and naturally tends to lead the enslaved to abandon themselves to a stupid carelessness and to vices of all kinds. No wonder then the blacks among us are, many of them, so destitute of prudence and sagacity to act for themselves, and some are given to vice. It is rather a wonder there are so many instances of virtue, prudence, knowledge, and industry among them. And shall we, because we have reduced them to this abject, helpless, miserable state by our oppression of them, make this an argument for continuing them and their children in this wretched condition? God forbid! This ought rather to excite our pity, and arouse us to take some effectual method without delay to deliver them and their children from this most unhappy state. If your own children were in this situation, would you offer this as a good reason why they and their posterity should be made slaves forever? Were some of your children unable to provide for themselves through infirmity of body or want of mental capacity, and others of them were very vicious, would you have them sold into a state of slavery for this? or would you make slaves of them yourself? Would you not be willing to take the best care of them in your power, and give them all possible encouragement to behave well, and direct and assist them in proper methods to get a living? I know you would. And why will you not go and do likewise to your slaves? Why will you not take off the galling yoke from their necks, and restore them to that liberty to which they have as good a claim as you yourself and your children, and which has been violently taken from them and unjustly withheld by you to this day? If any of them are disposed to behave ill and make a bad use of their freedom, let them have all the motives to behave well that can be laid before them. Let them be subject to the same restraints and laws with other freemen, and have the same care taken of them by the public. And be as ready to direct and assist those who want discretion and assistance to get a living as if they were your own children, and as willing to support the helpless, infirm, and aged. And give all proper encouragement and assistance to those who have served you well, and are like to get a good living, if not put under peculiar disadvantages, as freed negroes most commonly are, by giving them reasonable wages for their labor if they still continue with you, or liberally furnishing them with what is necessary in order to their living comfortably, and being in a way to provide for themselves. This was the divine command to the people of Israel, and does it not appear at least equally reasonable in the case before us? When one of their brethren had served them the number of years that were specified, they were commanded to let him go out free.

