If all who have slaves would act such a just, wise, and benevolent part towards them, and treat them in any measure as they would desire their own children and near relations should be treated, our slaves might all be set free without any detriment to themselves or the public, and their masters would be so far from losing by it that they would be abundantly rewarded for all their benevolence to these injured poor. And if our legislators would lend their helping hand, and form such laws and regulations as shall be properly suited to protect and assist those that are freed, and so as in the best manner to deter and restrain them from vicious courses, and encourage their industry and good behavior, this would be an additional security to the public against any imagined evil consequence of a general manumission of our slaves, and but a piece of justice to these poor, dependent creatures, whom we have made so by our own unrighteousness and oppression. This would encourage masters to free their slaves, and leave the objection we are now considering without the least shadow of foundation.
A. You are doubtless sensible, sir, that the legislatures in these colonies are so far from giving this encouragement to manumit our slaves, that the laws are rather a clog or hinderance to any thing of this kind, as they require the master to give security for the maintenance of his slaves if they should ever want any assistance, before he is allowed to make them free.
B. I am sorry to say there is too much truth in this. I hope our legislatures will soon attend with proper concern to this affair, and in their justice, wisdom, and goodness, enter upon measures which shall encourage and effect a general emancipation of our slaves.
But if this should not be, I think it appears, from the course of this conversation, that this will not excuse those who have slaves from setting them at liberty, even though they should be obliged to maintain them all their days. If any slaveholder can lay his hand on his breast and sincerely say, if his children were slaves at Algiers he would not desire their master to free them unless he could do it without any risk of their ever being a charge to him, then let him still hold his slaves in bondage with a quiet conscience. Otherwise I see not how he can do it.
A. If it were granted that our slaves ought to be freed, if times and the public state of the American colonies would admit, yet in our present peculiar, calamitous, distressing state, it may be very imprudent and wrong and tend to great evil to adopt this measure. Most of the slaves in populous seaport places have now little or no business to do, and are supported by their masters, while they earn little or nothing. And if they should be dismissed by their masters, they could not maintain themselves, and must suffer. And the attention and exertion of the public is so necessarily turned to the defence of ourselves, and this civil war introduces such calamity and confusion, that it cannot be expected, yea, it is quite impossible that there should be any proper care of the public, so as to make the provision and regulations which would be absolutely necessary in this case. Though I suggested this in the beginning of our conversation, yet I think you have paid little or no attention to it. I wish this might be well considered.
B. I think the facts you have now alleged as reasons against freeing our slaves at present, will, if duly considered, afford arguments for the very thing you are opposing. The slaves who are become unprofitable to their masters by the present calamitous state of our country, will be with the less reluctance set at liberty, it is hoped; and if no public provision be made for them that they may be transported to Africa, where they might probably live better than in any other country, or be removed into those places in this land where they may have profitable business and are wanted, now so many are called from their farms to defend our country; I say, if this be not done, the masters, by freeing them, would lose nothing by it, even though they continue to support them, till some way shall be open for them to help themselves. I must here again desire every owner of slaves to make their case his own, and consider, if he or his children were unjustly in a state of slavery, whether he should think such an objection against their being set at liberty of any weight. Would he not rather think it reasonable that the masters who had held them in bondage against all right and reason would consider their being, by an extraordinary providence, rendered unprofitable to them, as an admonition to break off their sins by righteousness and their iniquity by showing mercy to these poor, and that it ought to be a greater satisfaction to them thus to do justice without delay and relieve these oppressed poor, than to possess all the riches, honors, and pleasures of this world? And if these masters should disregard such an admonition and neglect this opportunity to set them at liberty, putting it off to a more convenient season, would it not be very grievous to him and overwhelm him in despair of their ever doing it? Is it not very certain that they who make this objection against freeing their slaves without delay, would not free them if the times should change and they again become profitable? If they must maintain them, can they not do it as well when they are free as while they are slaves, and ought they not to do it with much more satisfaction?
And as to the public, all necessary regulations and provision might easily and very soon be made, even in our present distressing circumstances, effectually to emancipate all our slaves, were the minds of men in general properly impressed with their misery, and they sufficiently engaged to do justice and show mercy. God is so ordering it in his providence, that it seems absolutely necessary something should speedily be done with respect to the slaves among us in order to our safety and to prevent their turning against us in our present struggle, in order to get their liberty. Our oppressors have planned to gain the blacks, and induce them to take up arms against us, by promising them liberty on this condition; and this plan they are prosecuting to the utmost of their power, by which means they have persuaded numbers to join them; and should we attempt to restrain them by force and severity, keeping a strict guard over them, and punishing them severely who shall be detected in attempting to join our opposers, this will only be making bad worse, and serve to render our inconsistence, oppression, and cruelty more criminal, perspicuous, and shocking, and bring down the righteous vengeance of Heaven on our heads. The only way pointed out to prevent this threatening evil, is to set the blacks at liberty ourselves by some public acts and laws, and then give them proper encouragement to labor, or take arms in the defence of the American cause, as they shall choose. This would at once be doing them some degree of justice, and defeating our enemies in the scheme that they are prosecuting.
This objection might be urged with much greater show of reason by the inhabitants of Jerusalem, against freeing their servants when they were not only in a state of war, but shut up, and closely besieged in that city; yet we find it was their duty to free them immediately, as the only way to escape threatened destruction; and as soon as they had done this they had respite, and would have obtained final deliverance had they not returned to their old oppression and again brought their freed servants into bondage.
This leads me to observe, that our distresses are come upon us in such a way, and the occasion of the present war is such, as in the most clear and striking manner to point out the sin of holding our blacks in slavery, and admonish us to reform, and render us shockingly inconsistent with ourselves, and amazingly guilty if we refuse. God has raised up men to attempt to deprive us of liberty, and the evil we are threatened with is slavery. This, with our vigorous attempts to avoid it, is the ground of all our distresses, and the general voice is, "We will die in the attempt, rather than submit to slavery." But are we at the same time making slaves of many thousands of our brethren, who have as good a right to liberty as ourselves, and to whom it is as sweet as it is to us, and the contrary as dreadful? Are we holding them in the most abject, miserable state of slavery, without the least compassionate feeling towards them or their posterity, utterly refusing to take off the oppressive, galling yoke? O, the shocking, the intolerable inconsistence! And this gross, barefaced inconsistence is an open, practical condemnation of holding these our brethren in slavery; and in these circumstances the crime of persisting in it becomes unspeakably greater and more provoking in God's sight, so that all the former unrighteousness and cruelty exercised in this practice is innocence compared with the awful guilt that is now contracted. 
And if we continue in this evil practice and refuse to let the oppressed go free, under all this light and admonition suited to convince and reform us, and while God is evidently correcting us for it as well as for other sins, have we any reason to expect deliverance from the calamities we are under? May we not rather look for slavery and destruction like that which came upon the obstinate, unreformed Jews? In this light I think it ought to be considered by us; and viewed thus, it affords a most forcible, formidable argument not to put off liberating our slaves to a more convenient time, but to arise, all as one man, and do it with all our might, without delay, since delaying in this case is awfully dangerous as well as unspeakably criminal. This was hinted in the beginning of our conversation, you may remember, and I am glad of an opportunity to consider it more particularly. 
A. You have repeatedly spoken of the attempt that is made to oppress and enslave the American colonies, and the calamities this has introduced, as a judgment which God has brought upon us for enslaving the Africans, and say we have no reason to expect deliverance, but still greater judgments, unless this practice be reformed. But is not this supposition inconsistent with the course of divine Providence since this war began? Have we not been strengthened and succeeded in our opposition to the measures taken against us, even beyond our most sanguine expectations; and a series of events very extraordinary and almost miraculous have taken place in our favor, and so as remarkably to disappoint our opposers and baffle them in all their plots and attempts against us? How is this consistent with the above supposition? If these calamities were brought on us for our sin in enslaving the Africans, and an expression of God's displeasure with us on that account, would he in such a signal manner appear on our side and favor, protect, and prosper us, even so that those of our enemies who are considerate and attentive have been obliged to acknowledge God was for us; I say, could this be, while we persist in that practice so offensive to him?
B. When I speak of our being under the divine judgments for this sin of enslaving the Africans, I do not mean to exclude other public crying sins found among us, such as impiety and profaneness, formality and indifference, in the service and cause of Christ and his religion, and the various ways of open opposition to it — intemperance and prodigality, and other instances of unrighteousness, etc., the fruits of a most criminal, contracted selfishness, which is the source of the high-handed oppression we are considering. But that this is a sin most particularly pointed out, and so contrary to our holy religion in every view of it, and such an open violation of all the laws of righteousness, humanity, and charity, and so contrary to our professions and exertions in the cause of liberty, that we have no reason to expect, nor can sincerely ask deliverance, so long as we continue in a disposition to hold fast this iniquity. If we should be delivered while we continue in this evil practice, and obstinately refuse thoroughly to execute judgment between a man and his neighbor, but go on to oppress the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, we should, agreeably to the spirit of what you have just said, improve such deliverance as God said the Jews would have done had he delivered them while they refused to reform. Surely this is not to be expected or desired. Even the prayer for such deliverance must be an abomination to the Lord. 
But your objection is worthy of a more particular answer. It has been observed, that there has been a general resolution to suppress the slave trade in these colonies, and to import no more slaves from Africa. This is a remarkable instance of our professed regard to justice, and a wise and notable step towards a reformation of this evil, and, as has been observed, a complete reformation will be the unavoidable consequence, if we will be consistent with ourselves. For no reason can be given for suppressing the slave trade which is not equally a reason for freeing all those who have been reduced to a state of slavery by that trade; and that same regard to justice, humanity, and mercy which will induce us to acquiesce in the former, will certainly oblige us to practise the latter. Have we not, therefore, reason to think that the righteous and infinitely merciful Governor of the world has been pleased to testify his well-pleasedness with that regard to righteousness and mercy which we professed and appeared to exercise in refusing to import any more slaves, and which is an implicit condemnation of all the slavery practised among us, by appearing on our side in the remarkable, extraordinary manner you have mentioned, by which wonderful interposition in our favor he has, at the same time, given us the greatest encouragement not to stop what we have begun, but to go on to a thorough reformation, and act consistently with ourselves by breaking every yoke and doing justice to all our oppressed slaves, as well as to repent of and reform all our open, public sins? So that God is hereby showing us what he can do for us, and how happy we may be under his protection, if we will amend our ways and our doings, and loudly calling us to a thorough reformation in this most kind and winning way.
But if we obstinately refuse to reform what we have implicitly declared to be wrong, and engaged to put away the holding the Africans in slavery, which is so particularly pointed out by the evil with which we are threatened, and is such a glaring contradiction to our professed aversion to slavery and struggle for civil liberty, and improve the favor God is showing us as an argument in favor of this iniquity and encouragement to persist in it, as you, sir, have just now done, have we not the greatest reason to fear, yea, may we not with great certainty conclude, God will yet withdraw his kind protection from us, and punish us yet seven times more? This has been God's usual way of dealing with his professing people; and who can say it is not most reasonable and wise? He, then, acts the most friendly part to these colonies and to the masters of slaves, as well as to the slaves themselves, who does his utmost to effect a general emancipation of the Africans among us; and, in this view, I could wish the conversation we have now had on this subject, if nothing better is like to be done, were published and spread through all the colonies, and had the attentive perusal of every American.
Since it has been determined to publish the preceding Dialogue, it was thought proper it should be attended with a particular address to you, who are more immediately interested in the slavery there considered.
It would be injurious, it is confessed, to consider you as the only persons guilty or concerned in this matter. The several legislatures in these colonies, the magistrates, and the body of the people, have doubtless been greatly guilty in approving and encouraging, or at least conniving at, this practice; — yea, every one is in a measure guilty who has been inattentive to this oppression, and unaffected with it, and neglected to bear proper testimony against it. And it is granted the public ought to go into some effectual measures to liberate all the slaves, without laying an unreasonable burden on their masters; but though this be not done, such neglect will not excuse you in holding them in slavery, as it is in your power to set them free, and your indispensable duty, and really your interest, to do them this piece of justice, though others should neglect to assist you as they ought.
It is hoped you will not be offended with the plainness of speech used on this subject, and that though you should at first think some of the epithets and expressions which are used too severe, and find the subject itself disagreeable, this will not prevent your attentively considering it, and weighing what is offered with the utmost impartiality and readiness to receive conviction, how much soever you may find yourselves condemned; for, if your practice is here set in a true light, — in which it must appear to all impartial, judicious, good men, and in which it will appear to all at the day of judgment, — you must be sensible you cannot too soon admit the conviction, and reform. And here it cannot be improper to remind you of your liableness to strong prejudices, which tend to prevent your seeing what in itself may be very plain. If you are indeed doing evil, according to the import of the preceding dialogue, these words of Christ are so far applicable to you, and are suited to awaken your jealousy of yourselves, and lead you to attend to the subject with great concern, circumspection, and earnest prayer to the Father of lights for that discerning and wisdom by which you may, in the case depending, come to the knowledge of the truth. And is it not worthy your serious consideration that they who are not interested in this practice, and have no slaves, are generally, if not every one, fully convinced it is wrong? Are they
not, at least many of them, as capable of judging in this matter as you yourselves are? and, therefore, more likely to judge right than you, as they are uninterested and impartial? The conviction of the unjustifiableness of this practice has been increasing and greatly spread of late, and many who have had slaves have found themselves so unable to justify their own conduct in holding them in bondage, as to be induced to set them at liberty. May this conviction soon reach every owner of slaves in North America.
To this end you are desired to consider what is more than once urged in the dialogue, viz., —
The very inconsistent part you act while you are thus enslaving your fellow-men, and yet condemning and strenuously opposing those who are attempting to bring you and your children into a state of bondage much lighter than that in which you keep your slaves, who yet have at least as good a right to make slaves of you and your children as you have to hold your brethren in this state of bondage. Men do not love to be inconsistent with themselves; and, therefore, this is so evident and glaring, that, if you will only suffer yourselves to reflect a moment, it must give you pain, from which you can find no relief but by freeing your slaves, or relinquishing the cause of public liberty, which you have thought so glorious, and worthy to be pursued at the risk of your fortunes and lives.
Is it possible that any one should not feel the irresistible force of this reason? And who would be willing to practice this glaring self-contradiction, rather than let his servants go out free, even though he should hereby give up the greatest part of his living, yea, every penny he has in the world? With what propriety will all such inconsistent oppressors be addressed by Him before whom masters and their slaves will
shortly stand as their impartial Judge.
Be intreated, also, seriously to consider how very offensive to God unrighteousness and the oppression of the poor, the stranger, and the fatherless is represented to be in the Holy Scripture. This is often spoken of as the procuring cause of the calamities that came on God's professing people of old, and of their final ruin. It may suffice to quote a few passages of this tenor, and refer you to places where others are to be found. 
Are not the African slaves among us the poor, the strangers, the fatherless, who are oppressed and vexed, and sold for silver? And will not God visit and punish such oppression? Are you willing to be the instruments of bringing judgments and ruin on this land, and on yourselves and families, rather than let
the oppressed go out free?
On the contrary, mercy, deliverance, and prosperity were often promised them, if they would leave off their oppressions and do justice and show mercy in delivering the oppressed, and showing kindness to the stranger and the poor. 
How can we attend to the voice of God in these sacred writings, and not see that you are most clearly pointed out? And will you be affronted, or even disregard us, while we entreat and conjure you by all that is important and sacred, so far to regard these threatenings and promises, and pursue your own highest interest and that of the public, as to let your oppressed slaves go out free? Do not say, "This is too great a sacrifice for us to make; who will indemnify us if we give up our servants?" The sovereign owner of all things has promised you indemnity, yea, infinitely more, deliverance from the awful curse which comes upon the oppressor, and his protection and blessing. And here it may be proper to remind you of the divine answer to the king of Judah, when being ordered to dismiss the mercenaries he had procured to assist him, he asked what he should do for the hundred talents which this army had cost him?
Without the former, the latter is nothing but gross hypocrisy and abomination to God; for he "will
have mercy, and not sacrifice." He requires no devotion or attendance on any religious rite or institution which is inconsistent with mercy, or that is done without the love and exercise of mercy; but rejects all such prayers and service as most dishonorable and abominable to him. And when we consider that Christianity is the greatest instance and exhibition of righteousness and mercy that was ever known or can be conceived of, and the great Author of it is, in the most eminent and glorious degree, the just God and the Savior, we shall not wonder that no offering can be acceptable to him which is without the exercise and practice of righteousness and mercy, and that "he shall have judgment without mercy that hath showed no mercy."
You who are professors of religion, and yet the owners of slaves, are entreated well to consider how you must appear in the sight of God, and of all who view your conduct in a true light, while you attend your family and public devotions, and sit down from time to time at the table of the Lord. If your neighbor wrong you of a few shillings, you think him utterly unfit to attend that sacred ordinance with you; but what is this to the wrong you are doing to your brethren, whom you are holding in slavery? Should a man at Algiers have a number of your children his slaves, and should by some means be converted and become a professor of Christianity, would you not expect he would soon set your children at liberty? And if after you had particularly dealt with him about it, and offered abundant light and matter of conviction of the oppression and cruelty of which he was guilty, he should be deaf to all you could say, and resolve to hold them and their children in slavery, what would you think of him when yon see him at his prayers, and attending at the Lord's supper? Would you think he was more acceptable to God than if he neglected these institutions, and yet had been so just and merciful as to set all his slaves at liberty? Yea, would you scruple to say his devotion and attendance on the holy supper were hypocrisy and abomination? If Nathan the prophet was here, he would say, "Thou art the man." 
The Friends, who are commonly called Quakers, have been for a number of years bearing testimony against this oppression as inconsistent with Christianity, and striving to purge themselves of this iniquity, rejecting those from fellowship with them who will not free their slaves. They indeed do not attend the Lord's supper, and it is granted they are herein neglecting an important institution of Christ; but ought it not to alarm you to think that while you are condemning them for this neglect, your attendance, in the omission of that righteousness and mercy which they practise, is inexpressibly more dishonorable and offensive to Christ than their neglect? These things you ought first to have done, to let the oppressed go free and break every yoke, and then not leave the other undone.
May you all, in this day of your visitation, know and practise the things that belong to your peace, and the safety and happiness of the united American colonies, by no longer oppressing these poor strangers wrongfully, and doing violence to them; but by executing judgment, relieve the oppressed, and deliver the spoiled out of the hands of the oppressor. May this counsel be acceptable unto you, and you break off this your sin, and all your sins, by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to these poor, that it may be a lengthening of the tranquillity of yourselves, your families, and of this now distressed land.
It is granted this oppression has been practised in ignorance by many, if not the most, who have been owners of slaves; and though this has been a very criminal ignorance, yet professors of religion and real Christians may have lived in this sin through ignorance, consistent with sincerity, and so as to be acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, in their devotions, etc. But though God has in time past suffered us, ignorantly, to walk in this wicked way, he is now using special means to open our eyes, and commands all every where to repent of his iniquity. And they who persist in this sin in opposition to the clear light and alarming admonitions which are now set before us, will greatly aggravate their own guilt if they do not hereby give just reason to suspect the sincerity of their profession. Some who are in the Scriptures declared to be good men, lived in evil practices, consistent with sincerity in their attendance on divine institutions; in which practices no Christian can now live consistent with his Christian character, because we enjoy much greater light than they had, and these evil ways are more fully exposed and condemned 
The members of this respectable society, by whom I have been invited to deliver a discourse before them, at this their annual meeting, on the slave trade, and the consequent slavery of the Africans, and all those who are present on this occasion will not expect that any thing new will be said on a subject which has been so much canvassed of late, and on which so many have written and so fully exposed the unparalleled unrighteousness, inhumanity, and cruelty, and the odious and horrible attendants of it, by which great light has been thrown upon it, and the attention of millions turned to it, and they have been led to execrate it as a most shocking, outrageous violation of all the rights of man. And there are none, or very few now, except those whose minds are blinded, and their hearts hardened by custom and their supposed interest, who do not condemn it, as contrary to the true and best interest of society, and, therefore, think all lawful endeavors ought to be exerted to suppress and abolish it forever.
But as it is not easy fully to explore this business, and comprehend it in all its length and breadth, and realize all the evils included in it, it is highly proper and important often to renew our meditations upon it, and to take those methods which are suited to impress our minds and the minds of others more and more with the iniquity of this practice, viewed in every different light, and in all the evil consequences of it.
In this view, and to promote such a design, the attention, patience, and candor of this respectable audience are asked to the following observations, which shall be introduced by some of the last words of the benevolent Redeemer of man, — who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save, — which he spake to his disciples when he was about to leave the world and ascend to heaven. 
This direction and command is an expression of the greatest benevolence to man. When the Son of God had become incarnate and taken upon him the form of a servant, and was obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, in order to make atonement for the sins of men, and bring in everlasting righteousness that God might be just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus, and had risen from the dead, he ordered that this good news should be published through the whole world, and the offer of this salvation be made to all mankind, of whatever nation or complexion, whether Jews or Gentiles, the more civilized or barbarians, rich or poor, white or black; this being the only remedy for lost man, suited to recover him from that state of darkness, sin, and misery in which the world of mankind lay and must perish forever, were it not for this salvation. 
And, as this is an infinitely kind and benevolent injunction, it points out and commands a duty, an employment, which must be most agreeable and pleasing to every benevolent mind, whatever labor and expense it may require. And they may reasonably think themselves highly favored and honored to whom ability and opportunity are given to preach the gospel, the unsearchable riches of Christ, to any of their fellow-men; or who are under advantage to promote this design, by any exertion in their power.
As the gospel affords the only relief for fallen man, so it is a sufficient and complete one, where the spirit of it is cordially imbibed and it is properly improved for the purposes which it is suited to promote. It raises sinners from the greatest moral depravity, guilt, and misery, to a state of light, pardon, and peace, and brings them finally to the enjoyment of complete and endless felicity.
This institution of Heaven, when properly attended to, understood, and cordially embraced, turns men from darkness to marvellous light. If it finds them in a state of savage ignorance and barbarity it civilizes them, and forms them to be intelligent and good members of society. It subdues the selfishness, pride, and worldly-mindedness of men, and all their inordinate lusts, and "teaches them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world." It raises the mind to the sight and contemplation of the most sublime, important, and entertaining objects, and manifests those truths, and gives that light, which are received with pleasing love and admiration; which make men truly wise, and animate them to the practice of every personal, social, and religious duty. It forms men to uprightness and the practice of righteousness, to universal benevolence and goodness; teaching them to love their neighbor as themselves, and to do to other men as they would that others should do unto them. So far as it spreads and has influence on the hearts and lives of men, it banishes the manifold evils under which mankind have groaned in all ages, and introduces peace, love, and harmony among men, and unites them together into a happy society, in which every one puts on bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness and long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving each other in love; each one studying and exerting himself to do good to all men, according to his ability and opportunity. At the same time, it forms men to the most sincere, uniform, and rational piety, in the exercise of love to God and the Redeemer, and to all his friends and servants; and they have joy and peace in believing and serving Jesus Christ, and their hope of eternal life in the kingdom of Christ is built and flourishes on the best and most sure foundation.
This command of Christ, to preach the gospel to all the nations in the world, respects not only the apostles and disciples who then heard him speak, and the ministers of the gospel in general who have since been, or are now, or shall be, appointed to that work, but is extended to all Christians, in every age of the church, requiring them in all proper ways, according to their ability, stations, and opportunities, to promote this benevolent design, and exert themselves for the furtherance of the gospel, that, if possible, all may hear and share in the happy effects of it. They who are not called to be preachers of the gospel may, in many ways, assist those who are sent forth to this work, and do much to forward the propagation and spreading of Christianity; not only helping by their prayers, but by liberal contributions of their substance, and by many other labors and exertions. Every true disciple of Christ who understands the gospel, and prizes it above silver and gold, and whose heart is expanded with love to Christ and benevolence to his fellow-men, must not only wish and pray that all nations may enjoy the blessings of it, and come to the knowledge of this saving truth, but considers it as an unspeakable privilege to be in any way, and in the least degree, an instrument of promoting this design, whatever labor and expense it may require. And it is owing to the great and inexcusable wickedness of men that the gospel did not soon spread all over the world after the resurrection and ascension of Christ, and was not embraced by all men from that day down to this time; which would have prevented the many and dreadful evils which have reigned in the world in all this period, and introduced a glorious scene and series of happy events, which exceed our present conception. Therefore, it can be attributed to nothing but the depravity of mankind that the command of the Savior has not been obeyed, and all men have not been made to share in the saving blessings of the gospel, but that it has been, and still is, so unsuccessful in the world.
Would we know the nature and excellence of Christianity, and the happy tendency of it to promote the good of mankind, both temporal and eternal, we must not expect to learn it from the general appearance of it in what is called the Christian part of the world, and the effect it now has on the greatest part of those who enjoy the light of it; but we must look into our Bibles, where it is properly and to the best advantage described, and all the doctrines and precepts which it contains are plainly written by the pen of inspiration; and there we are taught the effect it had on those who cordially embraced the gospel in the days of the apostles, and to what an excellent character it formed those who became true Christians; and we are informed by credible historians what a happy effect it had in the world where it spread and was embraced for the first two or three centuries after the ascension of Christ, until the administration of it was perverted by wicked men, who, with all their worldliness and pride, crept into the church, and perverted Christianity in its very nature and design, both in doctrine and practice, to accommodate it to their selfishness and pride, and so as to answer their own worldly ends. And there have been numbers who in all ages since, in the midst of the general apostasy and corruption, have held fast the form of sound doctrine contained in divine revelation, and in their life and practice have been the humble, harmless followers of Christ, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom they have shone as lights in the world, exhibiting an amiable example of faith, patience, righteousness, and benevolence, of which excellent character, we trust, there is a number now in the Christian world, and among us.
Among many other evil things which have prevailed in this apostate world are tyranny and slavery, introduced and practised by the lusts, the selfishness, pride, and avarice of men, which have been the source of unspeakable unhappiness and misery. The gospel is suited to root these evils out of the world, and wholly abolish slavery; and will have this effect where it is fully and faithfully preached, and cordially received and obeyed. For where this takes place, no one will forfeit his liberty, and, therefore, must have a right to it; and no man will make a slave of another, were it in his power, who has not forfeited his liberty by the sentence of proper judges; for in so doing, he would act contrary to the precepts of Christianity.
Christianity being, in the nature and tendency of it, and the particular precepts which it contains, thus opposed to slavery, did gradually, even in its most corrupt state, root it out among the nations in the Christian world, so that it was almost, if not wholly, abolished for some centuries, until it took place again, in a manner and degree which was never known before among any nation or people since the world began, in the abominable slave trade with the Africans, and their consequent slavery. That this business, which is such a gross and open violation not only of the genius and precepts of Christianity, but of the rights and feelings of humanity, should be undertaken and carried on by nations who call themselves Christians, and by individuals who bear that name, is truly astonishing. It is impossible fully to describe, or to have an adequate conception of, the crimes which have been committed in this business, or the evils which have attended it. If a man of observation, discernment, and humanity had attended this trade many years, and spent the residue of his life in the West Indies, under the best advantage to see the inhumanity and cruelty, and the various crimes, which take place in the treatment of the slaves, and the innumerable miseries which they suffer, he would, after all, have but a very partial idea and conception of the whole, and know but little, compared with all of this kind which takes place. How low and faint, then, are our conceptions of this enormous evil! The great Omnipotent alone, who will bring every work of man into judgment, with every secret thing, has a full, clear, and perfect knowledge of the whole of this great evil.
Suffice it now, in a few words, to say, that, by this trade in the bodies and souls of men, millions have been violently torn from their native country and from every thing dear to them; in the accomplishment of which, fire and sword, war and desolation, and slaughter of numbers exceeding our reckoning have taken place through a vast extent of country, and multitudes have been induced to betray, steal, and sell their countrymen and neighbors. Many thousands of these, thus taken from their country and all the enjoyments of life and liberty, and all their dearest connections, have died on board the ships, in their
passage to the West Indies or to other countries, and the rest have been sold, like brute beasts, into perpetual slavery, with their posterity after them, where the most of them are treated in a manner beyond description inhuman and cruel, by owners, masters, and overseers, many, if not the most, of whom are hardened against all the feelings of humanity towards their slaves, and are themselves a nuisance and burden to the earth; so that the West India islands, in general, are become the greatest resemblance of the infernal regions that can be found in this world.
In this general, but very superficial and scanty view of the slave trade and the slavery connected with it, who can forbear pronouncing that they who have encouraged, prosecuted, or supported this traffic in their fellow-men, — though some of them may have done it in ignorance and unbelief, — have really been the emissaries of Satan, and agents for him who delights in the wickedness and misery of mankind? And though they live in Christian lands, and call themselves Christians, and whatever plausible pretences they may make, they have all been really acting most contrary to the nature and precepts of Christianity, and doing the works of the devil; and nothing can be more dishonorable to the gospel and the Author of it than to attempt to reconcile this practice with Christianity.
This, indeed, has been attempted by some; and, among other things, it has been pretended that this treatment of the Africans was right and commendable, as it was the way to Christianize them, by bringing them from a heathen to a Christian land. But is this obedience to the command of the Savior — "Go into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature "? Is it not directly contrary to this command? Does this direct men to go into heathen lands and take men by force from their own country, and destroy a great part of them, and reduce the rest to the most abject slavery, in order to make Christians of them? Does it not rather command us to carry the gospel to them, and to take all proper pains, in the most friendly manner, to instruct and persuade them to embrace it, without any force or compulsion, that they may be happy in their own land while they live, and be saved from sin and misery forever? Do the dealers in slaves make any attempts to carry the gospel to Africa and propagate it there? Do they say a word to their slaves about the gospel, or do any thing that tends to lead them to embrace it? Has not their whole conduct, in their treatment of the Africans, a direct and strong tendency to the contrary? The slave trade, in the manner in which it has been carried on, tends to beget the strongest prejudices against Christianity in the inhabitants of the vast continent of Africa, and actually has done it in many nations; and nothing could have been done by those who bear the name of Christians more effectually to prevent the introduction of the gospel into that part of the world, and more directly to counteract the command of Christ to preach the gospel to them. And how do those who are brought from that country, and put into a state of slavery, and treated as the slaves generally are in the West Indies, naturally and unavoidably look upon these dealers in slaves, who are called Christians? Is it possible they should look upon them in a better light than we do the savages, not to say the inhabitants of the infernal regions? What, then, must they think of Christianity? Is this the way to persuade them to be Christians? What could be done more to prevent it? Many millions of these poor creatures have doubtless lived and died with the greatest aversion to Christianity, and even the name of a Christian, from the treatment they have received from those who have called themselves Christians. And if any have embraced the gospel and become real Christians, in circumstances tending so strongly to prejudice against it, this must be ascribed to the extraordinary, wonderful, and no less than miraculous interposition of divine power and grace; and no thanks are due to the dealers in slaves, whose whole conduct has been counteracted in these instances. And can it be believed that these dealers in slaves have carried on this unchristian, inhuman, and cruel business with a view to Christianize those whom they thus injure and oppress, or from any motives of benevolence or humanity? This seems impossible. But if this were possible, the treatment of these slaves demonstrates that no such motives exist while no proper methods are taken to instruct them in Christianity; and, in most instances, there has been not only no care taken to instruct them, but constant care and exertions to prevent it, added to the prejudices against Christianity which have been mentioned. And there is no reason to consider those many millions of slaves, who have been made so by this trade, as under any better advantages for instruction, or to become Christians, than if they had lived and died in their own country, a few instances only excepted. No; this business has been begun and carried on from that sordid selfishness and avarice which fortify men's hearts against the truths and precepts of the gospel, and will lead them to do the work of the evil one, in order to get money and promote what they con-
sider to be their worldly interest.

