Aire, August 6, 1767
My dearest Betsy, -- This place is midway between Calais and Lisle. We arrived here this evening safe and sound between eight and nine. I write from hence a few lines because if I were to defer it till my arrival at Lisle it would make a difference of several days. All I can tell you at present is that our journey and voyage has hitherto been favourable. Inform Mrs. Langdale that I saw her son this evening and delivered my commission; he is well and in good spirits.
My good girl, do you take care to keep up yours? I am most
excessively tired and so must conclude,
Yours, yours in truth,
P. F.

Brussels, August 11, 1767
We arrived here last night perfectly well, though not a little fatigued. This is the best news, and all that I am able to send you yet. We left my father at Lisle very much out of order; but we expect him here to-night. The roads are all paved, which I promise you is the most detestable circumstance in the world to a head naturally inclined to ache. We are vastly well lodged here, and intend staying all the week, but I see no likelihood of our going into Holland.
I lay at Ghent last Sunday night, and stayed there the greatest part of yesterday. Tell Mrs. Langdale that I saw her daughters and delivered her letter; they are perfectly well and I think surprisingly improved. Gravier is now sitting by to have his hair drest, in order to ascend a superb coach.
I have nothing to add but what you know, that I am yours most truly and affectionately.
Make my compliments to all friends, and kiss my sweet children.
Yours, yours,
P. Fr.
I wrote to you from a place called Aire in Flanders.
War Office, December 5, 1767
Dear Brother, -- As long as it remained uncertain whether you were floating upon the surface, or lying flat on your back at the bottom of the sea, I thought it in vain to continue writing to you.
But now that I understand by your first letter from Philadelphia, that you are man in esse as well as in posse, you shall find me as regular in my correspondence as the 'Monthly Review,' and perhaps as full of matter. The letter you mention to have written from the Madeiras never came to hand. I should think your landing there must have been a very agreeable circumstance, both as a relief from the sea, and a prospect of new faces. You ought to have told me in what manner you were received by my unknown cousins, of whom I understand there is a plentiful crop at the place where you find yourself. Are they civil to you, and do you spend your time agreeably? Tench Francis tells me that the principal house with which you had business to transact has stopped payment, and that probably your return will be sooner than you expected. Yet I
could wish you, and I daresay you would find it in every respect more eligible, to stay abroad for a few years, if anything material or any useful plan were to offer. Everything here is almost in the same state in which you left it. I take for granted that your letters from Fulham will give you a copious account of everything that relates to the family there. I have not given them any hint of your having left twenty pounds in my hands; nor do I intend, untill it may be absolutely necessary. For myself I think I have done as much as could be expected from me, in allowing them twenty pounds a year; at least I am sure it is as much as I could afford. Mr. Chandler promises the same annuity, yet I do not see how it will be possible for them to subsist upon less than a hundred pounds a year after their house-rent is paid, and I do not see much chance of
their getting such an annuity.
I have sent you a 'Court Calendar' for 1768; it is committed to the care of Mr. Dodd, who has promised to put it on board some ....
.... General Gage's secretary and factotum, and will I daresay be very ready to introduce you in the best manner to Mr. Gage, when your affairs shall call you to New York. I did not see Sir
Jeffery Amherst's letter to Gage, but I take for granted it was a handsome one. I shall leave all chitchat to your sister, who is indicting a long letter of that sort to you. We are in hourly expectation of some farther alterations in the ministry, by introducing some of the opposing parties into place. We are just informed of a very extraordinary combination entered into at Boston by all the principal inhabitants, not to use any one article of English growth or manufacture: such are fruits of our indulgence. But as to you, sir, I insist upon it that you neither make yourself a party man nor politician. My father has had the misfortune of a stroke of the palsy, which seized him all over about a fortnight ago at Bath: he is now pretty well recovered. I am going to Bath in the course of next week to spend the Christmas holidays. Mrs. Chandler I suppose is now at the summit of her wishes, for Mr. Chandler has bought a house in Bruton Street, Berkeley Square. When he has made the alterations he intends in it, it will really be fit for a nobleman. Governor Hamilton I suppose is as hot as ginger and pepper, since a woman of forty or fifty can set him on fire. Now, my dear fellow, I think I have nothing more to add, but
my warmest wishes for your happiness and success.
Adieu, adieu!
P. Francis
Henceforward you may depend upon my writing to you by every pacquet, and I wish you. would take every opportunity of letting us know how you go on.
The freshest political intelligence is  --  that the Earl of Northington, Shelburne, and General Conway, are to go out  --  Earl Gower to be President of the Council  --  Earl of Sandwich and
Viscount Weymouth to be Secretaries of State  --  Mr. Rigby, Secretary at War, and Lord Barrington Vice-treasurer of Ireland. Room to be made as occasion offers for the Duke of Bedford's friends.
Don't quote me for this.

London, March 12, 1768.
Dear Mac. -- The last pacquet brought me two letters from you, after a very long interval, of December 15 and January 20. The first observation I made upon them was, that they were
not under the Secretary of War's cover, upon which I leave you to make your own reflections. But now for my answers. As long as you grow fat in America, you may be said to be in a thriving condition; the future must take care of itself. But would it not be worth your prudence to consider what is to be done when your term with Mr. Neave expires? Undoubtedly you have considered of it; yet if you should not be able to resolve on anything, I am sure I enter too much into your situation to blame you. We have long since agreed how easy it is to find fault; but whoever fails you, be always assured that my heart will for ever be open to you; in short, if you cannot determine upon any plan where you are, you have nothing to do but to return to my house and stay in it untill something else can be thought of. I so much agree with you about landed possessions in America, and the security that may arise from them hereafter, that I shall commission my cousin Captain Francis, who is now here, to purchase a thousand acres for me in the course of next summer, which he assures me he can do for a mere trifle. By the by, this is a noble fellow, and if you meet him in America will, I am sure, contribute not a little to the happiness of your life there. My other unfortunate cousin, as far as I can learn, for I never see him, has no sort of prospect of being extricated from his difficulties without an immense loss. Poor fellow! I feel for him.
However, he found at last, by the sneers thrown out against him in the public papers and elsewhere, that to take Mr. Rice into the field was unavoidable ; and certainly this resolution, though too late, was the only wise one he could take. They met. Rutherford fired and missed Rice, who stood full, and as soon as he had received the fire, discharged his own pistol in the air. Upon this they were reconciled; but the paper war between the other parties has continued
as furiously as ever.
Your sister and the children are perfectly well. Your father writes so fully to you upon his affairs that I shall not trouble you with any other account of them. Besides I am but imperfectly informed in these matters, except that in general I understand the old folks are tolerably happy, and that Patty continues to be mad enough in all reason. To-morrow I set out for Bath, where I am to spend a week with a jolly party. That place has certainly bewitched me, yet one would think my father's going to reside there would have removed the charm. Did I tell you that Mr. Chandler has bought a large house in Bruton Street? They are now at the summit of their wishes in point of habitation. It is to undergo a thorough repair, and I think they expect to be in possession in two or three months. Wilkes is setting up for the City of London. We are all as mad about elections as ever you Americans were about the Stamp Act. I do not recollect anything else that has happened here worth your attention.
Pray let me know how my cousins in general have received you, or whether you have had any sign of life from Captain Maturin. It's now generally thought that Jack Wilkes 4 will be elected for the City of London. He dined with the Lord Mayor yesterday with the rest of the candidates.
Farewell, my dear Mac. Jusqu'au revoir.
P. Francis.
The pamphlets I shall commit to the care of Messrs. Neave. I send you herewith two letters from your father.
Your sister and nieces thrive tolerably.
Yours again and again. 

London, April 16, 1768
My Dear Mac. -- Since my letter of the last pacquet nothing has happened here of profit or of amusement; but I am determined you shall never want the consolation of a few lines, while I am able to write them. Mr. Wilkes, after failing in his attempt to be chosen for the City of London, thought it adviseable to offer himself candidate for the county of Middlesex, and has carried it by a large majority. The attention of the kingdom has for above a month past been entirely fixed upon this gentleman and his measures; and we still wait with fearfull expectation for the twentieth of this month, on which day he has pledged his honour that he will surrender himself in Westminster Hall.
About three weeks ago, our coach, with all the family in it but myself, was broken down in a most dreadful manner by a country waggon drawn by eight horses. It was hardly less than a miracle that seven people did not lose their lives by the malice and brutality of the fellow who drove the waggon. I have commenced an action against the owner, and with the help of your friend Mr. Meyrick and of Sir Fletcher Norton, whom I have retained, I have no doubt of recovering considerable damages. I enclose you a letter from your father. Sometime ago I sent you two pamphlets about your friend Rutherford and Coleman, which I hope you have received. They are now pretty quiet, though they remain mortal enemies. In the winter I suppose the war will break out afresh. Mrs. Chandler, I think, seems inclined to continue her contribution
of 40Pound a year to your father, and if she does she will act handsomely, and they may live more happily than ever they did. I hope and suppose that, by this time, you begin to see a little more
clearly what your future plan and expectation is likely to be. I must beg of you to be a little explicit upon this article, as I am really anxious to know what your views towards an establishment are, or whether you have any. I need not repeat what I hope you are convinced of, that, tho' all fail, my house is your sure retreat: so be not unhappy about a disappointment more or less, nor let any untoward accident discourage you, since you will always have the means of keeping your head above water with me, and something must inevitably turn up for your good. Your friend Oliver has been lingering for a long time under a consumptive disorder, which he
expected would kill him, but lately he finds himself surprisingly recovered. __ 's mother is dead. I met him not long ago at a gentleman's chambers, where there were ladies, fidelles, and all manner of riot; but he, thinking it incumbent upon him to preserve a becoming gravity, had no powder in his wig, and looked as black as Vulcan; but I don't know how it happened, before two hours were passed he contrived to get soberly fuddled, forgot his grief, and concluded with a minuet and a Scotch reel with two doxies. N.B. His mother could hardly have been cold, as she expired but the night before.
I had written so far when yesterday your several letters of February 10 and March 10 were brought to me. You are very good to write so much, and I assure you it pleases me not a little to
see that you can write in such good spirits, and with so much spirit. If these cousins of mine are so handsome, and so clever, and so inviting, take care of your heart. Observe that I forbid the bans. Pray take every opportunity that offers of assuring the handsomest of my cousins what a respect I bear to female beauty, and that, since they are handsome I do not love them the less for being my relations.
Your sister is greatly obliged to you for your ingenious letter, but contents herself with permitting me to answer for her. Her waist is swelling immoderately, and there are people who think she has taken a fourth dose of poison. You will probably hear more of it about the beginning of October inclosed I send you a letter I have received by the last pacquet from Captain Maturin, General Gage's secretary, by which you may perceive that you are likely to be on as respectable a footing at New York as you have found yourself at Philadelphia. Let me know whether you have heard anything of Mr. Atchy Thompson, to whom I gave yon a letter; what his circumstances are, and how he thrives.
My cousin the colonel I suspect is suddenly decamped, without beat of drum, for North America. He broke an appointment with me about three weeks ago, and I have never heard of him since. If you should meet, you will find him a sensible, brave, honest fellow, and from what I have said to him you may depend upon his inclinations to be attached to you. He has schemes for purchasing land in that country, which appeared to me not bad; by way of embarking a small property with him, he undertook to purchase a thousand acres for me. Be so good as to enquire a little into this matter and let me know your opinion about it. Your advice about stocks and funds is grave and pithy; one would imagine you knew the step of a lame duck by practice. For any enterprizes of mine you may be perfectly easy. Alas! now I am talking of money matters, it is no less true
than sorrowful, your Bank-note and the value of it are irrecoverable. About a month ago I had the satisfaction of losing a note for ten pounds in much the same way and with the same success. Intoxication!
The family of the Tenches1 I take for granted are now compleately happy. If the father has any of that Christian patience you talk of it is by no means thrown away upon him. Your letter from Madeira arrived sometime after your first from New York. Your account of the disputes about precedence between General Gage and Sir Henry Moore is perfectly ridiculous. Is it possible for
grave men to fight about a place in a country dance? I understood that Foote cleared four thousand pounds last summer: an immense sum for a man with one leg.
And now, my dear Mac., farewell! My hand is tired, and I have
said my say.
Farewell! Yours most faithfully,
P. Francis

London, May 14, 1768
My dear Friend and Brother,  --  . . . . Mr. Wilkes has been in the King's Bench Prison this fortnight, and must remain there till next term, when the errors of his outlawry are to be argued again. His friends, to the number of many thousands, have taken possession of St. George's Fields, and beleaguer the prison. Many lives have been lost, yet the mischief is likely to continue if not increase. . . .
You may say what you please of your Americans, but I'll be curst if we don't match you for riots. The worst on't is that they keep me at the War Office many hours a day more than I like. Such
marching and counter-marching! The Horse-Guards had no conception of such hot service. Many of them who quitted their trades without any other view but to become private gentlemen, complain loudly that the contract with them is dissolved, and are determined to retire. Mr. Wade's billiard match, on which other people have many thousands, and I have ten, pounds 1 depending, is to be played to-night. My reason is convinced I shall win, but the risk of such
a sum is enough to alarm the passions. The villain is brought on purpose from Naples to give Mr. Wade two and beat him. He is not half so like a man as a monkey. Foote swears he remembers
him keeping a glass shop on the top of Mount Vesuvius. He has had a particular dress made for him to play in, and never was anything more ridiculous! Having no more nonsense to spare at present I shall conclude in sober truth and sadness,
Your P. Fr
War Office, June 11, 1768
My Dear Mac.  --  This letter will be probably a short one for a very good reason  --  because I have not materials to make it a long one, for you know I do not mind trouble; not I. A letter of yours, dated in March, is arrived since I wrote last, but I think it does not require any particular answer, and if it did  --  for I have left it at home.
Domestic news is as insipid as usual. Children bawling, servants fighting, my wife scolding, your father and mother weeping, and Patty raving mad. These, with the addition of a preternatural
appearance, and some unaccountable noises which have been repeatedly in my house in Duke Street at the dead of night, make up the perpetual history of my family. Without a jest I have myself heard a most extraordinary ringing of bells about midnight, and have never been able to discover the cause. Now for news. Mr. Wilkes's outlawry is reversed upon an error pointed out by Lord Mansfield himself. He will receive sentence this term. Mr. Rigby is appointed sole paymaster-general, and Mr. Thomas Townshend is to be one of the vice-treasurers of Ireland.
Mr. Cooke, member for Middlesex, is dead, and Mr. Serjeant Glynn has declared himself a candidate. It is supposed he will succeed.
I am going to dine this day at  -  - __ 's in the country; he has taken an elegant house in the country, on Barnes Common, a carriage, and a w__ :he wants nothing now but a pack of hounds and a
couple of race-horses to furnish his character.
Your mother is at her house; she looks better than ever, I think, but has no hopes of seeing her dear child again. I cannot write more, but you may depend on my prayers.
Yours most faithful,
P. Francis

London, October 3, 1768

I am now to thank you for your letter of August 17. Pliny himself could not write better. We were apprehensive that a pacquet had been lost. Your account of the Moravians is pleasant
enough, particularly the community of women. In that article society is pretty nearly on the same footing here! I have sent you two more letters from Harris and Coleman, without knowing
whether you ever received the first. Rutherford had taken something so much amiss, that he went to France to conceal his resentment. Since that he has sold his share of the patent, and this day
gives us a grand dinner at the new tavern in Bishopsgate Street. This last, I take it, is not the readiest way to repair his fortune. We are all raving mad about the king of Denmark's masquerade, which is to be given next Monday. The tickets bear a higher premium than
those in the lottery. I have got one, and expect two more, to the grief of my friends and the astonishment of my enemies.
Your acquaintance here, I think, are all in statu quo. Mrs. Lessingham being hissed at her first appearance, made a speech to the audience, which brought them all over to her side.
Pray keep a look-out about the lands: though may I be eternally curst, if ever I cross the Atlantic, at least at my own expence. The price of corn is greatly fallen, and this, I think, is the only
good public intelligence we have. As to the rest, the stocks go down, and nothing is expected but bloodshed and battery. All this I have written before breakfast. My appetites, if not my
passions are up in arms, and desire their compliments to you, and so farewell.
P. Fr

War Office, January 4, 1769
My dear Mac. -- After all seasonable compliments and good wishes on my part, be so good as to read the inclosed history from your father. The good man writes enough for your whole family, and saves my conscience a world of scruples about the shortness of my letters.
I am just returned from spending a riotous fortnight at Bath. Gravier and two others filled a post coach, which was dragged with no small velocity by four horses. We travelled like gentlemen, and lived like rakes. All our news here is that Wilkes is elected Alderman of Farringdon Without. At this rate I see no reason why he may not be Sheriff and Lord Mayor in regular succession; and why not Prime Minister before he dies. In short nothing can be more ridiculous than every thing that happens about this gentleman. Every attempt that has been made to injure or oppress him, has in reality done him service; yet after all I apprehend he will infallibly be expelled the House of Commons. The election for Middlesex has raised such a ferment, that even America has been laid aside, and Corsica not once thought of. The ministry are supposed to be in a strange state of confusion, and many changes are actually talked of. So much for news and politics. The domestic history of Duke Street is pretty much the same as in my last. My son -- that is your
nephew and Gravier's godson -- thrives admirably, though God knows the weather is bad enough to kill a horse. While I lived at Batli in every species of debauche my health was unimpaired, but the moment I return to this cursed regularity of drinking nothing, and going to bed and getting up early, me void enrhume comme un tigre. I can hardly see, breathe, or speak; therefore I see no reason why I should write any more.
Sick or well, drunk or sober,
Yours I remain,
P. Fr
War Office, April 5, 1769
My dear Brother, -- Your friend Mr. Wharton has delivered his credentials. I have been, and shall be, as civil to him as I possibly can. He gives me such an account of you as is enough to make me love the man without farther recommendations. He says you are better received than any young man that ever went to America, and that you are likely, if the trade be not quite lost, to form such commercial connexions as yon may improve to a happy establishment at home. I wish you yourself would give me some hints of this nature to keep up my spirits.
The private history goes on as usual. My wife and children except Sally, are as fat as you could wish. My son is the finest boy of that age (viz. six months) in the universe. For politics and
news I refer you to the enclosed paper: it is a curiosity even here, and will he much more so in Philadelphia. Your friends of the crown party are in statu quo. Tell me something about lands.
I own it would be more to my credit to be able to fill a sheet to you once a month than write in the manner I do; but I think my brains, whenever I sit down to write a letter, are addled; and for
the life of me I cannot get one step farther, so I remain,
Yours, P. Fk.
Apropos, I condole with you on the death of your aunt. One naturally grieves at the death of a person who leaves one nothing to rejoice at. This has been always my case. No poor devil ever
had so little reason to rejoice at the death of his relations.

London, May 5, 1769
My dear Brother, -- The last packet brought me no letter from Philadelphia, so I have nothing to answer. If you do not furnish me with materials, the stream of my correspondence will flow in a
narrow channel. We have politics enough, God knows, but as I have not the honour to be entrusted with the secrets of either party, I can give you nothing but what you will see much more elegantly set forth in the newspapers. Truth is out of the question. Each party says and believes just what suits themselves without decency or moderation, and a neutral party is detested by both. A philosopher has no more chance among them than a cat in hell. (I wish,
by the by, that the person who stole my cat were in the warmest corner the devil could find for him.) The famous Middlesex petition was intended to have been presented to the King this day, but I hear that it is now deferred until Tuesday next. The same day, the counsel on behalf of the freeholders of Middlesex, who presented a petition to the House of Commons last Saturday against Colonel Luttrell's keeping his seat, is to be heard at the bar of the House.
My wife and children are in a flourishing condition. Your Quaker and Mr. Cox assure me that if the American trade be not quite lost, you are likely to form connexions in that way, by which
you may establish yourself advantageously at home. Comfort me with a confirmation of this intelligence
Adieu, my dearest friend! P. Fr
___is lower than Tartarus. Rosenhagen is become a great partisan for Wilkes, and in a short time will probably keep him company.
I hate faction for my own part because I am in place.
Yours, yours.

War Office, June 7, 1769
Dear Mac. --  .... The present state of politics stands thus: the French have lately received a severe check in Corsica. Nothing they have accomplished yet has done them any honour. Government
assists Paoli underhand, and subscriptions are openly advertised for individuals to pay in their contributions to the cause of liberty. The Turks have been defeated and lost a place of some importance. It is thought that this rupture with Russia will be fatal to the Ottoman empire. Poland is ruined. Denmark is armed, and in a strong state of defence. The King of Sweden has declared his resolution to remain quiet and take no turn or part either way. Lord North has assured the House of Commons that, at the opening of next session, there is a resolution to accommodate
matters with America, to the satisfaction of all parties. No bad news, I presume, for your worship. The Duke of Grafton is shortly to be married to Miss Wrottesley, a niece of the Duke of Bedford. This match occasions much speculation, as it threatens a close union of families, consequently a coalition of political strength. Wilkes has not of late been much the subject of conversation. The supporters of the Bill of Rights seemed to separate their interests from his, and I believe have done neither him nor themselves any good. The freeholders of Middlesex have presented their petition to the King without any apparent effect Vale!
P. Francis

London, July 5, 1769
Dear Mac. -- I find it ,so abominably hot, that if I had anything to write my fingers would hardly have strength to perform their office. But this is a state of weather which we have no great
reason to complain of. If it had but fructifying virtue enough to bring my son's teeth into view, I should not care if all the hay in England were reduced to tinder. His gums, however, perform the
office of teeth to a miracle.
News since my last. -- Messrs. Townshend and Sawbridge are elected aldermen and sheriffs, with an astonishing unanimity. The Lord Mayor, sheriffs, and three City members are this day
gone up with the City petition to the King. The county of Surrey have also voted a petition. The militia of Buckinghamshire have refused to be embodied, and I hear this spirit prevails in other
counties. Paoli escaped in an English vessel to Leghorn. The news from America make things worse and worse. Those from the East Indies rather better. I have just heard that when the Lord Mayor presented the petition, he said, 'Sir, this is a petition from your Majesty's City of London, complaining of grievances which, we humbly hope your Majesty will redress.' The King received it with indifference, gave it to one of the lords of the bedchamber, and passed on without speaking. Alderman Beckford then pulled the Lord Mayor by the sleeve to draw him away. Be cautious how you quote me for any political intelligence. We are assured that Lord Chatham is to be at the levee on Friday.
I am going for a week to Tunbridge Wells. Give my respects to all my relations of all sexes, colours, and conditions.
Yours most faithfully,
P. Francis
London, August 2, 1769
My dear Mac. -- Your letters are always very copious, and very entertaining, but the matter of them seldom requires an answer; so I leave them at home when I write at the War Office, and answer you as it happens.
I see plainly that one of my letters to you has miscarried, in which I told you that both our tickets were returned blanks. Fortune would not even trust us with twenty pounds. This miscarriage of
my letter vexes me, for I fear it has fallen into the hands of the Philistines, and what more was in it God knows. I suspect the misfortune happened while General Gage was at Boston.
Your sister is tormented with the cramp, and your humble servant has actually the rheumatism in his left shoulder. Last night I had it on the other side. The change is pleasing enough. You are not
my friend, if you do not hear with more than ordinary pleasure that Mr. Peter Godfrey, who died about three weeks ago, has left our honest Gravier a fortune in money and land equal to more than 50,000Pound. Yet this gentleman was not his patron. His expectations were always founded upon Mr. Thomas Godfrey, who is still alive, and who, I doubt not, will leave him the bulk of his fortune.
N.B. The said Thomas is seventy-six, and has kept his room eighteen months. Is not this a glorious situation? He has no enemies, and his friends are forced to confess he deserves it all.

London, December 6, 1769.
Dear Mac. -- I told you in my last that I had bought you a ticket, No. 47,170. I am afraid you will be more disappointed than I was, when you hear that it is come up a blank. My son had a ticket,
which has met with the same fate. But he himself is a prize, and as to the lottery I expect no better. Our political affairs stand pretty much as per last. Petitions gain ground in all quarters -- but still I think the Ministry stand their ground, and seem determined to meet the present parliament. They have received a signal blow in Ireland, and how they will proceed is more than I can comprehend. The House of Commons there have thrown out the Money Bill, which I take to be the same thing as refusing the supplies, and I now hear they are prorogued. They have also very 'near brought Sir George Macartney, the State Secretary, on his knees at the bar...
London, January 13, 1770.
My dear Brother, -- Notwithstanding I am at this moment overwhelmed with a torrent of all manner of business, and all the plagues of Egypt, I cannot let a packet go without a few lines. We are all in the strangest political confusion that I believe this country ever experienced. Lord Chatham has declared himself in the most decisive manner against the proceedings of the House of Commons. The Chancellor the same; for which he is turned out, but nobody yet in his place. The Commander-in-Chief the same, and it is supposed lie will be out in a few days. Sir George Saville, Bourke, and others, doing everything they can to be sent to the Tower. All this curious enough. I wish we were all quiet. These times will only answer for people who have nothing to lose.
War Office, February 7, 1770
My Dear Mac. -- I wish with all my heart that I had time to do justice and pay you an equivalent for the kindness, and, let me say with gratitude, for the length of your letters. I have received those of the 2nd and 13th December. If I waited until I had time to answer them as I ought to do, I believe you would never hear from me again. The present condition of politics is enough to agitate the mind of a calmer person than I am, and with official business I promise you I am almost overwhelmed. The Duke of Grafton's resignation has left the administration in the hands of the Duke of Bedford's friends, who seem determined to hold fast as long as their
employments are tenable. The opposition is truly formidable, and increases every day. On Monday last, two most vehement protests against the proceedings of the majority were signed
by forty-one lords, a greater number, I believe, than ever signed a protest before. By the next packet, you may be pretty sure that things will be brought to a consistence, and we shall all know
what to trust to.
Give my love to Colonel Francis, and bid him take care of my acres. I am, sincerely speaking, hurried to death.
Adieu my dear friend!
Yours most faithfully,
P. Fr
I was just going to seal this letter, when I received yours of the 2nd of January. A thousand thanks to my poor cousin, and all my good wishes. Tell him if he will send an exact description of the lands, I believe I could get the grant for nothing. I depend upon his skill in the choice. It is really impossible to say any more.
Don't let it be confined to a thousand acres if more good land can be had.


