Portsmouth, Feb. 14, 1760
My dear Sir,  --  There does not appear the least likelihood of our ever leaving this miserable place. The winds are not satisfied with detaining us here, they blow tempests against us. However, my Lord keeps me so constantly employed that the time is far from hanging on hand. I ought to tell you that I have every reason to think I shall live very happily with him. It must give you pleasure to know I am so well situated. My servant John, too, pleases me extremely. Lord Strathmore and Mr. Pitt are most amiable young men, so that I cannot travel in better company. We have nothing new here, nor, indeed, could expect anything from such a kennell.
My best respects to Mr. Calcraft.
I am, dear Sir, always yours,
Phil. Francis

Portsmouth, February 21, 1760
Dear Sir,  --  We went on board the 'Windsor,' Captain Cleveland, last Sunday, as I informed you. After going through the utmost misery from calms and contrary winds, we were obliged to land
again on Tuesday night. I never felt more real pleasure than in once more visiting this wretched place. The wind is fair again this morning; but I cannot think of the ship 'Windsor ' without horror and detestation. Young Mr. Pitt is troubled with fits. He had one last night so terrible that it almost communicated itself to me. This morning he is so weak that he cannot be moved.
I am still strong in bank. My only expense has been in clothes and washing; I was obliged to make two shirts serve. But I cannot thank you enough for this attention to me. The people here are greatly interested in Lord Charles Hay's trial.
I am, dear Sir, alway yours,
P. Francis
Lisbon, March 30, 1760
My dear Sir, -- A packet arrived here last Tuesday, and brought me your several letters, with the papers enclosed. I thank you most sincerely for them all. The secret extracts of Prince Ferdinand's letter, which you bid me expect, were not to be found; but I hope to receive them by the next packet. Lord Kinnoul had his first audience of the King on the 21st; the only event of any importance that has happened since my letter of the 10th inst. Our time has hitherto been employed in making and receiving visits of ceremony, in which the secretary bears a principal and very laborious part. I have been sent to the several ministers, ambassadors, &c., to announce His Excellency's arrival. As they all live at many miles' distance, the fatigue of travelling
through the sun is far from inconsiderable. However, I had the satisfaction of gratifying my curiosity to see the Conde D'Oeyras Carvalho, who governs the kingdom in a most despotic manner. His influence over the mind of a very weak prince, and his headlong resolution in the management of one great affair, have gained him a reputation in England, which people here think he by no means deserves. His preserving his authority with the King, and his making the most violent use of absolute power, are but equivocal proofs of his understanding and courage; cunning, obstinacy, and revenge usque ad internecionem, are qualities willingly allowed. How far this general character may be true, the event of our embassy will better show. He received me with politeness and many professions of regard for the Earl of Kinnoul. If he be what we imagine him, fair words will be probably all we shall obtain.
The King and all the Royal Family received Lord Kinnoul in the most gracious manner. They say such a reception has not been known at this court. The speech he made was accepted as an
entire satisfaction for the affair off Cape Lagos. We shall proceed to other points, when the ceremonial visits are over. The weather is prodigiously hot; but, as everything here is conducted in a manner diametrically opposite to reason, common sense, and the practice of every other country, shade is despised, and not a tree to be seen, except olives, which afford none. I had always a very bad opinion of this nation; but at present I have entirely altered it. Instead of finding them moderately execrable, I see that all our ideas of what is superlatively bad, come far short of the qualifications of a Portuguese. Imprimis, I take for granted they come into the world the wrong way ; however, certain 'tis, they rock their children in the cradle heads and points, not sideways. This ingenious method seems happily calculated to prevent their sleeping by any accident. The boys go to school in heavy cloaks, which cover all but their eyes, and always march with a becoming gravity. This fashion of walking prevails so strongly, that they will even
suffer themselves to be run over, rather than discompose themselves by stirring out of the way. The first day I went out, my chaise ran over a man and two boys. The postilion took no kind of notice of it, nor even turned back his head. I endeavoured to stop and get out, but could not make the driver understand me. It was happy for me he did not. The least expression of concern or
humanity for the sufferers might have been fatal to me. The mob would certainly have murdered me; whereas by persisting boldly, they either think one in the right, or are intimidated.
This is a sample of the Portuguese manner of thinking. If a servant offends, we must not strike, but kill him; he will assuredly revenge a blow by assassinating his master, without running the
least risk of punishment, whereas his death would be attended with no sort of inconvenience. The King is a beggar; his troops beggars; the nobility utter beggars; but no term is poor enough to express,the beggary of the Plebs (the commons). Let it suffice to say that half a moidore would purchase every crime that even a Portuguese could commit.
This city affords most shocking and astonishing scenes of ruins. All the handsomest part of it was destroyed by the earthquake. We ride through the remains of the town with fear and trembling. The people are so perverse and dilatory, that they have left whole ranges of walls standing unsupported, which frequently fall and crush the passengers, who walk under them quite unconcerned. I think this is the dullest place I ever saw; no kind of diversion going
forward, especially in Lent. We visit for ever. I hope Mr. Adair is well, my uncle Jewell, and Nancy. When you write to Ireland, pray remember me. My best respects wait upon Mr. Calcraft, Mr. Wade, Mr. Dormer, and Mr. Chitty, and all friends. I am perfectly well, and live in great state, and am highly considered as an appendix to his Excellency. But respice finem. All's well that ends well.
I am, dear Sir, yours most sincerely,
P. Francis

Lisbon, April 14, 1760
My dear Sir, -- I have received your letter of March 25, and thank you for the very great trouble you took in writing me an account of Lord George Sackville's trial. It furnished a very interesting entertainment to many people here. I return you enclosed the remainder of Lord Charles Hay's. Prince Ferdinand's letter is most important, and shall be secret.
The character I gave you of this nation, in my last, was perhaps too harsh; to speak more favourably of them I ought to say that their abject slavery, ignorance, and beggary are their misfortunes; that pride, sloth, perverse obstinacy, ingratitude, cowardice, and revenge are the foibles of the Portuguese. As to more abominable vices, such as treachery, murder, assassination, &c., they are only unlucky in having a hundred times the natural propensity to them that any other nation can boast of. The more ridiculous parts of their character are exactly described in Gulliver's account of Lagado under Laputa: 'the houses very strongly built, and most of them out of repair. The people in the streets walk slow, look wild, their eyes fixed, and are generally in rags,' &c. (I never knew a soil so unhappily cultivated, &c.)
I intended to have desired you to send me a suit of silk clothes for the birthday of his Most Faithful Majesty on June 6; but my Lord Kinnoul, who sends to London for the same purpose, undertakes, of his own accord, to make his sister buy it, and send it by the same conveyance. This polite offer will save trouble; and I take for granted he means a present; but I shall not understandit so.
I am quite jaded with writing despatches. Mr. Shuckburg will give you a little narrative, which contains the only news this wretched place affords. Mr. Allen desires to be earnestly remembered to you.
I am, dear Sir, yours most sincerely,
Phil. Francis
My best compliments to Mr. Calcraft, Mr. Wade, and all, all friends.

Lisbon, May 3, 1760
Dear Sir, -- Since the last packet sailed on the 17th of last month, Lord Kinnoul took us all upon a party, I cannot call it of pleasure, into the country. We were dragged in the worst carriages by the worst cattle, and over the worst roads of Europe about thirty leagues, to Cintra and Mafra. The weather was uncommonly bad, so that we enjoyed nothing but trouble and inconvenience. I was
as much delighted to return hither, as I should be to get to London from hence. Lisbon is certainly the dullest and most stupid place I ever was in, except Portsmouth. I am greatly apprehensive we shall stay here until winter.
I am extremely sensible of the trouble you must have had in attending to Lord George's trial; it was so well taken down, and is in itself so interesting, that my title of secretary acquired no small
addition of importance by my receiving and communicating such authentic intelligence from England. The only news here is that your old friend Ensenada is recalled. Such a resolution in the new King of Spain does not seem very favourable to the English; everybody agrees that the French interest has had a great share in the measure.
My compliments to Mr. Calcraft and all friends.
I am, dear Sir,
Your most obliged and most affectionate
P. Francis
My Lord Kinnoul works me to death. We thought his character was economy; I can assure you he is as generous as a bprince.

Lisbon, May 17, 1760
Dear Sir, -- I hope you have long since got the better of your court-martial fever. It was paying too dear a price for my gratification in reading Lord George's trial. At present I believe the
whole city of Lisbon is full as hot as the horse-guards could have been; I am constantly in a warm bath. From the nature of this climate we must expect the heat to increase every day until
autumn, so that our present is cool when compared to what it will be in September. I dread the thoughts of remaining here so long, but I think it seems too probable.
Last Thursday the Ambassador gave a grand entertainment to several of the first nobility. For ignorance, beggary, meanness, and pride they certainly have not their fellows in Christendom. An English tailor is a fine gentleman in appearance when compared to the first duke in this land. Baskerville's Virgil was produced after dinner, but by no means attracted their attention; very few of them knew in what language it was written. Upon being asked if I understood Latin I was unfortunate enough to say I did; but I fear it lessened my credit among them. For I had certainly won some of their hearts by gorging them at dinner till the tears ran down their cheeks. This is literally a fact; they ate until evidently they were on the point of bursting. Of learning, or any other accomplishment whatever, they have no idea; riding is their chief study, and in that they pretend to excel. Among this crew of wretches I must except two noblemen, with whom you are acquainted.1 Their superior understanding and merit have produced an effect very natural in Portugal; they are feared, consequently ill used at court, and despised and hated by the rest of the nobility. You have heard that the Portuguese have a superstitious notion of their King Sebastian's returning and governing the kingdom one day or other. They are now perfectly satisfied that Sebastian Jose (Carvalho) was the man who fought in Africa. Some indeed are of another opinion -- that it is the devil himself who has been gracious enough to honour Portugal with his
presence, and governs his best beloved as devils should be governed.
I am of the latter opinion.
I am, dear Sir, yours most truly,
Phil. Francis.
It is so burning hot at this moment that I can scarce wag a finger.
My best compliments to Mr. Calcraft. I hope Mr. Fox and his family are well.
Remember me to all friends.

Lisbon, July 24, 1760
Dear Sir, -- I have two of your former letters of the 3rd and 24[th] of June to acknowledge and thank you for, which arrived since the last packet sailed from hence. You desire an account of the birthday. Let it suffice to tell you that nothing can be more mean and contemptible than this court, and everything that belongs to his Most Faithful Majesty. He lives in a house which an English commoner would almost despise. I assure you, take it altogether, there never was such a shabby specimen of royalty. Between ourselves, the late marriage, which has given such joy here and in England, will probably have as little effect, as the Grand Vizier seems to have intended. The women of the Braganza family are notoriously barren, and this lady has been kept unmarried (designedly I dare say) until the age of eight-and-twenty, an age that affords little hopes of children in this country. The Prince, Don Pedro, has hitherto lived in an unviolated course of chastity, which people here are not good-natured enough to place among his moral virtues.
I see I gave you too high an idea of my clothes; I only meant comparatively. For, as lace is prohibited, and most of them use silks of their own miserable manufacture, a tolerably handsome
suit is uncommon. As to clothes, for further provision, I hope I shall want none. I bought a black frock and silk waistcoat upon my arrival; and have since made a suit of camblet, which is handsome. The violent heat of the weather made it unavoidable. Everything is lined with silk here. These, with other smaller expenses, which it is needless to enumerate, have exhausted all my money ; but I shall wait for your direction before I raise more. I ought to mention washing, a very dear article, and the making of the silk suit. I flatter myself with the hopes of seeing London by the 1st of November and not before. If I have time I will certainly write to Mr. Dobson upon his new dignity. At Lisbon he would have the title of Corregidor Mor. We have a person here, who never knows whether the weather is cold or hot, but by consulting his thermometer. Let the Justice be informed that it is now at ninety in the shade - a little more, and we should breathe fire. The Portuguese women, in general, are far from being handsome enough to excite either love or jealousy; in the first place, the best of them are but pretty Jewesses, of whom some very few are really pretty; their complexions, generally very bad, are utterly destroyed by hereditary impurity of the blood. Without such radical corruption it would be difficult to account for the
amazing and prodigious ugliness which prevails among them all. Sallow complexions, distorted features, blotches, cicatrices, &c. &c. in every visible part of them. But this is nothing compared to what the smell suffers in their company. I question whether they are at present so subject to jealousy as we have imagined. Some old customs, still observed with regard to their wives, and their not appearing constantly abroad (which last may justly be attributed to poverty), I believe is all the foundation we had for this opinion; not but that I should be sorry Mr. Chitty were dans le oas; for he would certainly fall a sacrifice to their natural taste for assassination, though not to their jealousy.
What an ample field for daggers! Per todos os Deos! I should not neglect to inform you, that on the second of this month the Ambassador gave a most magnificent and splendid entertainment to the ministers and nobility belonging to the court, upon the occasion of the marriage. A noble dinner, a fine concert for the ladies, and at night some elegant fireworks exhibited in the garden, where twenty-two swivel guns were planted on an eminence to announce the healths. The house was handsomely illuminated, as were all those of the English merchants here. All Lisbon, I
believe, was assembled to see us. At twelve o'clock the company sat down to a supper, prepared with a profusion and elegance equal to the rest of the day. Open house was kept, and my Lord Kinnoul was to come off for 650Pound: it did us great honour.
:: On Sunday the 13th inst., I was invited by Sir Harry Frankland to see a grand bull-feast from his Barraca or Lodge. To have a true idea of the Portuguese, you should be acquainted with this
their favourite diversion. I think I shall not be severe upon them when I say it is the most abominable entertainment that was ever invented; but at the same time, I confess, nothing could be better adapted to the genius and disposition of the spectators. 
I hope Mr. Fox and his family are well. I hear of his having lately given a place to Mr. Powell in his office, in a manner that does him infinite honour; it was indeed a masterpiece. Mr. Calcraft
always has my best wishes and thanks. [Col. Sandford, Dr.Bruce, and Mr. Adams, Mr. Wade, Mr. Dormer I wish to be constantly remembered to. How does Mr. Featherstone recover?] I
have written to the Justice. I cannot say I approve of Mr. Rigby's mode of proceeding, nor
would I have you expect anything from him. On Monday last two of the King's brothers were banished ; they had hitherto been treated as Highnesses, and taken rank as Princes of the blood. I suppose this fellow will banish the King himself at last. I wish, with all my heart, he would take a fancy to banishing us from this unhappy country; I should be very well contented never to see
it or him again. My Lord Marshal arrived here last Sunday from Madrid, and goes to England by this packet. He is as grave as a Spanish grandee ; but extremely well bred.
I am afraid I have tired you with a very uninteresting detail; for, in fact, what is there in this country, by which you can possibly be affected? However, it will not be useless, if it proves my goodwill. Need I say that letters from England are always joyfully received
here?
Mr. Allen is well, and desires to be remembered to you.
I am, dear Sir, yours very truly,
Phil. Francis

Lisbon, August 22, 1760
Dear Sir, -- Since my last of the 4th inst. nothing of any consequence has happened here, except that an entire rupture with the Pope has been declared by three royal edicts, forbidding all communication between Portugal and Rome. Besides the weakness of that See, His Holiness' Ministry are by no means able to vie with Carvalho in cunning; and the low politics of Italian priests, if opposed to regularity and firmness, are easily overturned. They say this kingdom will save above two hundred thousand pounds by the rupture, which used to be sent annually to Rome to purchase bulls and dispensations. It seems that this Ministry is determined that whatever accomodation shall be hereafter concluded, such impoverishing abuses shall never be again admitted. However advantageous such disputes among the Catholic powers may appear
to be for England, I very much question whether it be our real interest that Portugal should recover from the ignorance and dependence in which she is sunk.
I send you enclosed a pasquinade lately made upon Cardinal Torregiani, the Pope's Secretary of State, who is accused of having brought matters to this extremity by his rash and violent conduct.
I hear no accounts of our return, which puts me out of all patience. I shall tell you hereafter why it vexes me particularly.
One would think people at home are blind, or have lost their senses, or pay no attention at all to this country. A few days ago I took up twenty-five moidores upon Mr. Wood's account, five of which I gave to John. People here set so small a value on money, that a less sum would have disgraced me in the eyes of the merchant to whom I applied. This circumstance is most true.
The silk fabric here, which since the earthquake had three hundred workmen, is so much declined that at present it has literally but three, and everything in the country seems to flourish in the same proportion.
I am, dear Sir, yours very sincerely,
Phil. Francis.
I beg to be remembered to Mr. Calcraft (Dr. Bruce, Mr. Dobson, Mr. Adair, Mr. Wade) and all friends, and I hope my uncle and cousin Tench, whom you never mention, are well. As to the quality of my letters I shall not dispute with you, but in quantity and number you must allow they have an evident advantage over you.

Lisbon, September 9, 1760
Dear Sir,  --  We continue in our usual insipid style, nor indeed is there any prospect of our ever being troubled with vanity as long as we stay in this miserable country. A pacquet arrived about ten days ago, and brought me your letter of August 12, but not the slightest intelligence about our return. The next will either determine our immediate departure, or fix us here for the winter. My heart aches at the thought of such a catastrophe. I am very well pleased with the expectation you give me of going, to the Congress, and depend entirely upon every interest that my Lord Kinnoul can possibly employ for me, but I think there is not the least probability of his going thither himself. No, I fancy he is tolerably well satisfied by this time with such expeditions. The great object I have in view is in going to Paris whenever a peace is concluded. As to courts of this rank and character, one may reside at them for ever without ever knowing anything beyond their own paltry particular intrigues. However, I do not think my time absolutely lost, as this country, though it makes so mean a figure in Europe, is closely connected by trade and political interests with England. It certainly is not the place in the world to polish one's manners. For my own part I am not sanguine enough to expect anything from Mr. Rigby, and yet I believe I am not quite so phlegmatic as you imagine. When you have it in your power to serve him, you may expect your reward. But if that should ever be the case, it will not be amiss to stipulate beforehand. Last Wednesday his Most Faithful Majesty laid the foundation stone of the high altar of a church to be erected on the very spot where he was wounded; it is dedicated 'Beatre Virgini Marice Libe-
ratrici et Sancto Josepho Protectori.' I believe this is all the news that Portugal affords. We are literally placed in the tag end of the world, where it is scarce possible anything should happen of
importance to the rest of it.
I hope Mr. Fox and his family are well. My best respects to Mr. Calcraft.
I am in great hopes of seeing you this day six months.
Yours most affectionately,
P. Francis
My compliments wait on Mrs. Sally.

Lisbon, October 29, 1760
Dear Sir, -- A packet arrived on the 18th inst. with five mails full of glorious news for the public, and agreeable news for us in particular. I need not answer your several kind letters at present,
as I hope to have the happiness of seeing you within a few days after this reaches London. My Lord Kinnoul has made such expedition in preparing for his departure, that we shall go on board the 'Isis' next Saturday evening, and, if the wind proves favourable, proceed early next morning. We had our audience of leave yesterday. His Excellency was received, as usual, most graciously. After all the formal audiences were finished the Conde d'Oeyras went to him, and told him that his Majesty desired to speak to the Earl of Kinnoul in private; when he went in, the King began by saying in Portuguese.
His Majesty pronounced all this in an open, easy, and very friendly manner. So saying he presented him with a gold box, containing an immense brilliant, which the jewellers here value at
thirteen hundred pounds. As my Lord will choose to tell this most handsome story himself, I would not have made it too public. The Portuguese call this compliment a grand Jineza. It is with
difficulty I can find time to write, for literally I am almost fagged to death. No wine can be brought. Mr. Adair's is ready at Oporto, and only waits for a convoy.
I am, dear Sir, yours most affectionately,
Phil. Francis

Tuesday, August 14, 1764
My dearest Betsy, -- I thank you for your letter of Friday last; it was one of the most agreeable I have received from you, for two reasons -- because you talk of your return, and because you give me hopes that you will return in health. The bed will be sufficiently aired for your mother, as Rosenhagen has been lying in it for this month past, and will continue to do so till Saturday next. We are but just returned from an expedition to Blackwall, where we have been to pay a visit to honest Gravier: the poor fellow is amazingly pulled down, and looks so thin you could hardly know him, but is in good spirits. I have commissioned him to buy a complete set of table and tea china, and I propose laying out about 20Pound in it. The children are perfectly well. The time till Monday seems long, but it will come.
Yours ever,
P. F.
Thursday, August 16, 1764
My dearest Betsy, -- Besides thanking you for your letter, I have nothing to say but that Rosenhagen set out yesterday with Gravier for Dunkirk. The latter was obliged to go thither upon business, and the parson1 thought he could not have a better opportunity of seeing France than that which offered yesterday. The scheme was proposed at five o'clock yesterday, and at six they were in the post-chaise. This is what you may call a sudden resolution. Words cannot express my impatience to have you in my arms. At seven on Monday I expect you. Will the machine bring you to the door, or where shall I order James to wait for you? Remember to ask for my handkerchief at the Cat Inn at East Grinstead. To say the truth, my dear girl, I have been dining with honest Fitz & Co., and am not in my perfect mind; but you see that, even while I forget
myself, I still remember you. It is true I am endowed with a most capricious humour, but I am always wise enough to know that I am possessed of the best girl in the world, and that I never could be happy without her. Adieu. P. F.
If I had any news to send you my letter should be longer. You know how mortally I detest writing; nothing could possibly make me so punctual but that I believe it gives you a pleasure,
and I hope contributes to keep up your spirits.

June 4, 1765.
My dearest Betsy, -- Although I have two letters from you since I wrote last, yet I have so little to say at present that I question whether I shall fill more than one side. Everything here is so much the same that if I would be new I must be obliged to invent; and this, I think, is hardly worth while. Mrs. Sneyd is brought to bed of a boy; not much to the satisfaction of the father, who begins to be of opinion that it is possible to be plagued with too great a number of children.
It was owing to your brother's disappointing me, and changing a plan he had proposed himself that I did not go to Mr. Ch -- r's. I cannot think of going to Paris before the beginning of next month at soonest, if at all. So I hope there is no doubt of seeing you long before that time. But pray, madam, now we are upon the subject, when is it you propose to come home again? You have now been gone near three weeks. For my own part, I shall be happy to have you with me, yet do not wish you to return, as long as you can stay with convenience and satisfaction to yourself. But pray be pleased to let what your plan is.
The want of a library, I should think, must be very disagreeable, and what is worse it shews Margate to be a wretched, ill-provided place. Pray how do you live, and what sort of provisions do you get? Have you got the hammercloth? Remember for the future to seal your letters to me a little better, as the outside cover is sometimes opened by other hands. I send you the newspapers regularly three times a week, and hope they answer the purpose of some little amusement, but I take for granted that what with your bathing, your riding, and your children, the time does not hang too heavy upon your hands.
I have never seen anything of the Gordons or Pownals, nor indeed inquired at all about them. I went to Chitty's on Saturday evening and staid till Monday morning: my horse kept me company, and contributed to make my time pass agreeable enough. Old F. has, I believe, certainly got this place at last; and the young one will, I verily believe, go with me to Paris, in spite of his wife and Jack Clark. Yours, my dearest love, eternally,
P. F.
I forgot to tell you that I paid a visit this morning to Gorman for the first time, and introduced myself to his new wife. She appears to me to be a very agreeable young woman, and has much the air of being well bred. I promised that you should wait on her when you returned.

June 8, 1765.
Indeed, my dearest Betsy, I am very serious when I say I think your absence long, and the prospect of three weeks more appears almost an age. However, if you and the children are benefitted by it, I shall be satisfied, and leave it to your own judgement. I suppose all moderate exercise must be of service to you, therefore have no objection to your dancing a little. All I apprehend is that the company may not be such as you ought to dance with. Doctor
Macnamara, with whom I am to dine at his house in the country to-morrow, tells me he cannot set out in less than a fortnight, so I suppose you will see but little of him and his family. I supped last night at Vauxhall with your brother, Fitz, and Clark. This scoundrell, I suppose, has not yet sent you the hammercloth, but I shall make a deduction for it. I hope you have not only a good appetite but also good provisions to pacify it withal. I am told you may have excellent fish of all sorts. As your letters for the future will be franked, I shall make no scruple of writing as little as I please, and to as little purpose.
I dine at Gordon's yesterday  --  they enquired properly about you and desire their compliments. Mine to your mother, and kisses to the children.
Yours, my sweetest love, always and with the greatest truth,
P. F.

June 11th, 1766
This post is very convenient, for though we are above seventy miles off, I hear this morning how you did yesterday. This is so great a pleasure to me that I wait with impatience for the hour of
the post, and woe be to you if you disappoint me. I am perfectly satisfied that you will not dance with any but a proper person, but that was not what I meant; I am apt to suspect that the general run of the company is not of the best, therefore would wish you not to make yourself too cheap among them. Who did you dance with? The time till my dearest Betsy returns seems full as tedious to me as it can do to you. I wish it were possible for me to take a trip to Margate, but that would make it impossible for me to execute my Paris scheme. Your brother and Fitz and I went to Foote's last night, and afterwards they supped upon bread and butter with me. Mr. D'Oyly desires me to tell you he is determined to frank for nobody but you. I wonder tbe Chandler people have never invited me to their country house, for it seems that what he said to your brother hardly amounted to an invitation. I shall certainly not think of going untill they ask me in form; and indeed it is fall as well as it is; I had much rather have you there at the same time.
My sweetest Betsy, I hope you think of me, and that you really, wish to be with me again; if you do not you are ungrateful to the last degree. Haven't you fixed the day yet for your return? As
you are such a constant bather, I should imagine your stay might be shortened. But all this I leave to yourself. As I write constantly twice a week, you ought to be contented, though I don't
complain of your wishing to hear oftener from me. I wish Sally would do me the favour to say a few words; can't you persuade her to write a line or two to me?
Yours, my dearest Betsy, for ever,
P. F.




