London, February 28, 1774
Gentlemen,  --  Being appointed by the legislature to be one of the Council of Bengal for the term of five years, and now preparing for my departure, it becomes necessary to state to you what my wishes are, with respect to the choice of one of the representatives for the Borough of Wareham, at the general election or at the next vacancy. On the other side of this letter is a copy of a paper, written and signed by my late worthy friend, Mr. Calcraft, the original of which is in your possession. It contains a request and injunction to you, his trustees and executors, in my favour, which I doubt not you will
implicitly comply with. But as my absence from England will prevent my immediately availing myself of the benefit and honour intended me by Mr. Calcraft, it is my earnest desire and request to you, that you will employ the interest vested in you by his will, to return my intimate friend Christopher D'Oyly, Esquire, of Little Charles Street, Berkeley Square, as member for the Borough of Wareham, at the next general election or at the first vacancy that
may happen, instead of myself. He is a man whom Mr. Calcraft highly esteemed, and to whom there can be no objection on any account. My own particular reason for wishing that he may be elected in my room is, because I can depend upon his honour that if, on my return from India, I should require of him to vacate his seat, he will be ready to do so; and that in the meantime he will supply my place in parliament with the greatest honour and ability. In
case of his death while I am abroad, I hope and expect that due care will be taken of my interest, and that whoever succeeds him shall be bound by an honourable obligation to vacate the seat, if, upon my return from India, I should require it.
London, March 30, 1774.
I have paid into Messrs. Drummond's hands the sum of 500Pound for your use, and subject to your orders. This, with the sum of 93Pound, which I leave with you, amounts to 593Pound. My intention is to allow your father 25Pound a year, to be reckoned from the day I embark. Of this he has already received ten guineas on account. You will pay him the remainder  any time within the year; but do not advance any more till this time twelvemonth. You are to pay my father's pensioner half a guinea on the twelfth of every month.
On April 1, 1775, my trustees are directed to pay you 631Pound 6s, or such a proportion of that sum as you may desire, and so on annually. You will leave it at Drummond's, and draw for it as you want it. Keep an account of your drafts that you may know how your money lasts. If the above annuities fall in, you will have the advantage of it.
As you are to have the above sum paid annually on a stated day, it is not material to you whether I leave the rent, taxes, schooling, &c., paid up or not to the day of my departure, but I shall leave you an exact state of those articles, as they stand due. I wish you may be able, for three years at least, to live on this allowance; but I should be very unhappy to think you were distressed. You are therefore at liberty to apply to my trustees for 50Z. more, if you find you want it at the end of the year. This, I hope, will remove all difficulties and apprehensions. I have made the best provision I can for my son's education. I
need not recommend it to you to see him often, and tell Mr. Bibouville freely anything you think amiss. The girls will fall more particularly under your care. Sally is to come home at Christmas next, or at Midsummer 1775 at farthest. I leave that and everything relative to the periods of their going to and quitting the school to your own discretion.
I wish you to live rather a retired, but not a dull and melancholy life.
You have acquaintances enough, and I wish you to avoid new, ones. In general, prefer those friends who live nearest to you. Let the girls be taught a grave, modest, reserved carriage. I dislike hoydens. Keep them constantly in your company (when from school), and observe everything they do. Let them have exercise abroad, and constant occupation at home. Take care what books
they read; and if you take them to a play, which should not be above once in a winter, let it be some ridiculous comedy and pantomime at which they may laugh, bat nothing sentimental, or that borders upon indecorum. Above all things, never suffer them to be idle. The older they grow the more necessary you will find this rule to be. When you want medical assistance you may always have that of Mr. Adair and Dr. Macnamara. Keep an account book
for all the money you pay (exclusive of your house and private expenses), and mark the day to which every article is paid up. 
The Condition of our Commerce with Portugal was very little improved by Lord Kinnoul's negociations. His Instructions, it is true, did not intitle him to hold a peremptory Language. We were involved in a most expensive War, and
notwithstanding our successes, had no Allies to spare. This at least, in Mr. Pitt;s Opinion, was no Season for increasing the number of our Enemies. With respect to Portugal, I am convinced he was mistaken; but, even if he had thought it advisable to adopt a firmer System of negociation with that little Court, the Execution of it must have been disgraced by so feeble an
Instrument as Lord Kinnoull. We found a French Ambassador at Lisbon, whose Organs were very differently constituted from ours. It was not possible for the French Nation to be more truly represented than by the Comte de Merle. He was lively, vain, insolent and polite. With respect to us, the most unlucky part of his Character was his Penetration. He saw in a Moment
what Sort of a Eival he had to contend with, and resolved, if he could, to lower the Triumphs of the English Nation by mortifying and degrading their Ambassador. He asserted that he had an indisputable right to take the Pas of the English Ambassador on all Occasions whatsoever; that the point had
either never been disputed by us; or that it had been formally yielded and did not admit of a question;  --  and that he was determined, at all Events, to maintain the right and Honour of the Crown of France. It was in vain for the Portuguese Ministers to propose Expedients to a Man of this Temper. He
would not listen to anything that conveyed the most distant Idea of Equality, and in fact he carried his point. The question was, which of them should go first into the King's Closet.  --  The French Ambassador always took his Station at the Door till it was opened, and would suffer no Man to enter before him. In
this Situation Lord Kinnoull had no honourable Remedy but to go up to the door and remove the French Ambassador by Force. The other of course would have drawn his sword, and a Battle must have ensued between them in the King of Portugal's Presence. Lord Kinnoull had too much Discretion to run the
risque of such an Extremity. Instead of taking the Quarrel upon himself, he stated the Case pretty fairly to Mr. Pitt, who in return sent him Orders, in the King's Name, to assert the Precedence due to the Crown of England, and dispute the Pas with the French Ambassador. By this Instruction, which he neither had Courage to execute or disobey, Lord Kinnoull's Distresses were compleated. At last however the Conde de Oeyras helped him, in some degree, out of his Difficulties, by obtaining a prior Audience for him on the day on which the Marriage of the Princess of Brazils with her Uncle was declared.
But as this Audience was granted at an unusual hour, the Point in dispute with the French Ambassador never came in issue, and in Effect was left upon as disgraceful a footing for us as ever.
Lord Kinnoull, by constant Assiduity and Compliance, had ingratiated himself with the Prime Minister, and of course was a sort of Favourite at Court. His Favour indeed did not serve to promote the Object of the Embassy, but it occasioned his being treated with a great deal of personal Distinction and
Eespect. In Consequence of a Difference between the two Courts about
the Value of a Present offered to Carvalho, when he was Envoy in England, it had been agreed for some years that no Presents should be given at the Departure of their respective Ministers. Lord Kinnoull had his audience of Leave in the usual Form, and was dismissed with a multitude of gracious Expressions. A few minutes after he had quitted the Closet, the King of
Portugal sent to desire to speak with him again. -- ' My Lord,' says he,' I have taken Leave of the English Ambassador, but I should be sorry that the Earl of Kinnoull should leave my Court, without receiving some Mark of my personal Eegard for him.' So saying, his Majesty presented him with a gold Snuff Box, in which was a Brilliant, valued at twelve hundred Moidores.
 --  When a Favour is conferred in this handsome manner, the Portuguese call it a Fineza, and no People understand better how to refine upon a Compliment.
I do not think it difficult to account for their Conduct, tho' few Events have created a greater Variety of Speculations. The Tone, given by the Court and adopted by more than their dependants at that time, was to rail at the Arrogance of a Minister who deserted the Service of his Country at a critical
Conjuncture, because the Privy Council did not yield to his Opinion for an immediate Declaration of War against Spain. This was the substance of the Charge. The rest was Ornament or Invective. There was some Appearance undoubtedly, but no Truth in this kind of Language. Mr. Pitt's resolution must have been founded on a Consideration of three Facts, of the reality of which he had very sufficient Reason to be convinced.
 -- 1 "That the King's Confidence, without which the Post of Minister, excepting some few extraordinary cases, is either unsafe or precarious or dishonourable, was intirely engrossed by Lord Bute.  --  2d That the King and Lord Bute were determined as soon as they could to patch up a peace with France, almost
upon any Terms.  --  3d That if the War with France was continued, a War with Spain was inevitable In this situation he had the Choice of three Systems of Conduct before him. If he concurred with the secret Views of the Closet, and made himself the Instrument of an ignominious Peace with France, the Consequence would be, that he must lose all Credit with the Nation and be turned out of Office whenever the King thought proper. If he continued to act, after his Advice against Spain had been rejected, he had nothing to expect but perpetual Contradictions from a decided Majority in Council, a total Loss
of Dignity, Responsibility without Power, and the Regret of having missed the most graceful Opportunity of resigning. It remained then for him to insist on a War with Spain, which in spite of the King would have fixed him in the Ministry, or to leave to his Enemies the Task of continuing the present War,
with the prospect of another before them, or the still more difficult Task of putting an End to it on terms adequate to our Successes and satisfactory to the Nation. His Conduct, in my Opinion, was a Masterpiece of personal Policy, of which, at the same time, his Country had no reason to complain. He might
have sacrificed himself by continuing in a Post no longer tenable with honour; but neither would the King have suffered him to hold it longer than was necessary to disgrace him, nor would it have been of any Benefit to the Nation. His Conduct, thus far, was too bright and too elevated not to receive some
Shade or Diminution from the Acceptance of a Peerage and a Pension. He deserved greater Rewards from the English Nation, but, at that moment, he should have refused them from the King. The first Measure adopted by his Successors was in effect the highest Compliment imaginable to the Man whose Advice they had rejected. As a French Author expresses it,  --  they paid
a sort of Homage to his superiority. They had hardly taken their seats in Council before they were obliged to declare War against Spain. he might deserve to be called ingenious. But in the Conduct of Affairs he was literally Mr. Pitt's Clerk, with hardly any qualification but Zeal and Assiduity. I never saw anything like a masterly Performance from his Pen. In private Life he was amiable and respectable. No Man did more for his Family and his Friends. He was chearful too, and happy in Society  --  until he came into Office again with Lord Weymouth. Conceiving then that he governed the Nation, he grew proud, reserved, and miserable. Never was a better Man more hurt by Advancement.
On the Expectation of a War with Spain in 1770, he sold large sums in the stocks on Speculation, and concluding that Lord Chatham must necessarily be called upon to take the Lead, he persuaded Lord Weymouth to resign. Neither of these Events taking place, it was suspected that the considerable loss he suffered in the Stocks, added perhaps to the Reproaches of Lord Weymouth, drove him to despair, and that he put an end to his life. As soon as the peace was concluded Lord Bute determined to resign, yet to continue to govern the King and Kingdom, if he could, without appearing in any ostensible or responsible Employment. His Friends pretended to say that this was originally his Plan, and that he never meant to remain in Office, after he had once accomplished the great work of Pacification; but I have good ground for judging differently of his motives. I have no doubt that both he and the Princess Dowager meant that he should continue Minister for Life, but
that he was frighted from his Post by the Clamours of the Nation and the growing antipathy against the Scotch, excited and fomented by the writings of John Wilkes. He yielded to a storm, which he might possibly have weathered, if he had possessed courage enough to face it. He thought however that his secret influence would still be secured, by committing the Government to three of his dependants. These were Halifax, Egremont, and George Grenville. The two first were little more than names. It was apparent that the weight of
power would follow the Treasury, and devolve upon Grenville. Fox now saw, with Spite and Rancour, that he had been labouring for the Advancement of a Man he hated. There was a Time, at which he might have been Minister himself and succeeded Lord Bute at the Treasury. His heart failed him at the Juncture, and he repented when it was too late. After the new Arrangement was settled, he sent Calcraft to Lord Bute to say that he was ready to act. From that moment I date the Dotage, which has since reduced him to nothing.
The King however rewarded his Services with a Peerage, which had before been given to his Wife, and continued him in the Pay Office. His Friends of course fell from him very fast, Rigby and Calcraft among the first. He accused them both of Ingratitude, as if a Minister out of Power had any claim to
Friendship. How far the first was engaged to him I know not. Calcraft undoubtedly owed his rapid Fortune to Mr. Fox's patronage. He was the Son of an Attorney at Grantham, and went to London literally to seek his Fortune. At the age of six and forty he had a landed Estate, the Rent Roll of which was above ten thousand Pounds a year. In his quarrel with Lord Holland I think he had as much Reason of his Side, as an interested Man can have for deserting an Old Friend and Benefactor. There was not Virtue enough in either of them to justify their quarelling. If either of them had had common Honesty, he could never have been the Friend of the other. Lord Shelburne, Marquis of Lansdowne, who was then no more than a Messenger between Fox and Bute, had heard the former, in a fit of Passion or Peevishness, declare that he was determined to quit the Pay Office, and retire from public Affairs. This
Intelligence he carried to Lord Bute who made his Arrangement accordingly. Fox, who had no thoughts of relinquishing seven thousand pounds a year, and certainly had not commissioned Shelburne to answer for his Intentions,
denied his having ever made such a Declaration. Shelburne appealed to Calcraft, who, preferring the Interest of Truth to every other Consideration, gave Evidence against his patron. The Question between these virtuous Men was, how far Honour was to yield to or prevail over Gratitude. Fox affirmed that, if his service required it, Calcraft was bound to foreswear himself.
Calcraft on the other hand, seeing the Decline of his Patron's Influence, which it was apparent he could never recover, did not apprehend that Gratitude ought to carry him so far. They parted with more public hostility than was quite prudent in men so well acquainted with each other's Defects. A Reconciliation was impossible, for each of them knew the Heart of his Enemy. From that time we may date the Origin of Mr. Calcraft's Patriotism. Before he openly went over with Shelburne and Barre to Lord Temple and Chatham, he thought proper to declare War with Lord Bute by the most violent and
outrageous Manifesto that ever was penned against a Minister or a Gentleman. Bute shewed his Letter to my Father, and complained of it as the grossest Insult he had ever received. What were the Causes of Calcraft's Resentment I know not, but I can answer for it he preserved it to the moment of his Death.
Amidst all these villainous Transactions, my Father had more reason to complain of ungrateful Treatment than anybody. From the year 1756, he had been incessantly employed. He almost lived at Holland House, and was the Friend and Favourite of the Family. He taught Stephen and Charles to read, and Lady Sarah Lennox and Lady Susan Strangeways to declaim. The Conduct of these Ladies, it must be confessed, has not done much Credit to his Instructions. Lady Susan thought proper to marry a Player, whose Person promised more than it was able to perform. Lady Sarah, encouraged by the
Vanity or Ambition of the Family, looked at nothing less than the Crown. The young King was evidently more partial to her than suited the Views of Bute and the Princess Dowager. Yet he permitted them to choose a Wife for him, and had not Spirit enough to choose even a Mistress for himself. Lady
Sarah was ready to be either. When that hope failed, she accepted of Sir Charles Bun bury and was married by my Father, who, I presume, has been heartily cursed by them both for the share he had in bringing them together. It is remarkable enough that both these Ladies were disappointed in their Men.
Considering all Circumstances, my Father was not unreasonable in expecting an Irish Bishoprick or some handsome Provision in the Church. Lord Holland affected to lament his Inability to serve a Man, whom he professed to love and esteem; yet had Interest enough to make Mr. Young, a poor Curate, who
married his natural Daughter, a Bishop in Ireland. I have often seen that worthy Prelate and his Wife at Breakfast and Dinner with his Patron's Servants. Such Christian Humility entitled him to a Mitre.
When Lord Holland went to Italy in 1763, he left my Father as unprovided for as when he found him; except that he bequeathed him as a Legacy to Lord Bute, who transferred him to George Grenville. Thro' this Recommendation, he afterwards obtained a Pension out of the Privy Purse of three hundred Pounds a year. In the meantime however, he felt the Distress of his situation, and was stung with the Idea of so long having been the Dupe of a Scoundrel. His Resentment burst into a Flame. He wrote to Lord Holland in violent
terms, which where, for want of better Employment he busied himself in laying schemes. In these I concurred with him heartily. I had no hope of advancement but on the line of Opposition. I was sincere tho' mistaken in my Politics, and was convinced the Ministry could never stand the Consequences
of the Middlesex Election. In the separation of Chatham and Temple, when the former accepted the Privy Seal, Calcraft had carefully kept up an Interest and secret Correspondence with them both. It was not long before Chatham discovered that had cajolled and deceived him, that the Duke of Grafton was undermining him in the Closet, and that the System of the double Cabinet, which had ruined Lord Rockingham's administration, continued to operate as powerfully as ever. As soon as there was a prospect of a rupture between Lord Chatham and the Duke of Grafton, Calcraft made it his Business to reconcile the Brothers, and effected his purpose by convincing them that their mutual
Interest required it. This indeed was obvious, and to such Men no other Motives were necessary. The next Step was to effect a reconciliation between Chatham and George Grenville. This would not have been a difficult matter, if nothing but Demonstrations of Enmity had passed between them. Expressions of hearty Contempt are not so easily forgiven. The three Brothers consented however to a Meeting, at which every Man was ready to throw the Blame of former Mistakes upon himself, and shed Tears in abundance. They were all good Actors, and performed their parts to Admiration. Another Object still required the good Offices and Mediation of Mr. Calcraft. His great property  and constant profession of wanting nothing for himself, gave him a considerable weight with all Parties. The Marquis of Rockingham was at the head of the only Set of Men, that, in point of Numbers, deserved to be called a Party. He considered Chatham as the immediate Cause of the Dissolution of
his own Administration and hated him accordingly, tho' in effect it was Northington who gave the finishing Stroke to his Credit with the King. This Temper carried him so far that, when Chatham afterwards made him some Advances, Lord Rockingham refused to receive his visit, and turned him out of his House without seeing him. But lasting Enmities are much upon the same footing with lasting Friendships in the Breast of a Statesman. The Interest of all parties evidently required a Coalition, and Calcraft was again the Mediator; at least he told me so. To his Industry and activity the Opposition were in
some measure indebted for the formidable Appearance they made in the beginning of the Year 1770, when Chatham, Camden, and Granby resigned, when Yorke put an end to his Life, when Grafton abandoned the Government, and North succeeded to what I believe he himself and every Man in the
Kingdom at that time thought a forlorn Hope. It is not easy to say, by what means all these flattering Expectations were disappointed. Calcraft thought we might have succeeded, if Camden had not given the Duke of Grafton a respite of some days, and kept the Seals after they had been demanded of him,
while the Negotiation with Charles Yorke was depending; or if Granby had resigned with Spirit, and thrown all his Commissions at the King's feet; or at last, if the Leaders of the Opposition could have agreed among themselves about the Treasury. It was soon discovered that they were quarrelling
about the spoils, before they had gained the Victory. The Court were well informed of these Divisions, and determined to hold a steady Countenance. The Influence of the Crown is so powerful, that if the Administration can but gain time, they must always conquer.
Notwithstanding the famous Protest of forty-two Lay Lords, and all Chatham's Eloquence, Calcraft and I soon saw that the Game was lost with respect to Opposition in general, but we still thought it possible that Chatham might be sent for alone. This would have suited him much better than a general change of hands and we knew he had no scruples about deserting his new Friends. On the Approach of a Rupture with Spain about Falkland Islands, these views revived. Chatham came forward again, and attacked the Ministry with
wonderful Eloquence. I took down from Memory the famous Speech he made on the 22nd of Nov. 1770, and had it published in a few days. It had a great Effect abroad, and alarmed or offended the Ministry so much, that they determined to shut the Doors of the House of Lords against all Strangers, even
Members of the other House. I was present at that ridiculous Scene of Riot and Confusion, when Lord Gower, first Marquis of Stafford, interrupted the Duke of Manchester in the middle of his Speech, and moved that the House should be cleared. After a loud and shameful Clamour, which lasted half an hour, the Opposition Lords retired in a Body and protested. The Stroke however was fatal to the Opposition. It was in vain to make Speeches, when there was no Audience to be informed or inflamed, nor any means of dispersing them among the people. Still however we thought a Spanish War inevitable, and that Chatham must be employed. Lord Weymouth, on that Conviction, resigned the Secretary of State's Office; and I lost five hundred pounds in the Stocks. By that loss however I gained Knowledge enough of the Mode of transacting Business in the Alley, to deter me from entering into such Traffic again. The Convention with Spain sunk me and my hopes to a lower State than ever. If Chatham had come in, I might have commanded anything, and could not but have risen under his Protection. In the Course of the above Debates in the House of Lords, a circumstance happened, which I think deserves to be remembered, that it may appear how much the greatest Men may be and often are indebted to little ones. Woodfall the printer had
been tried before Lord Mansfield at Nisi Prius for printing a Libel,  --  I think it was Junius' Letter to the King, and found guilty of printing and publishing only. Lord Mansfield accepted the Verdict. The Attorney General moved the Court of King's Bench that the Verdict might be entered up according
to the legal sense of the Words. Woodfall's Counsel petitioned for a new Trial. According to the established Proceedings of the Court, the Grounds for granting or refusing a new Trial must arise from some defect in the Verdict itself, and must appear on the face of the Record. Lord Mansfield, in making his Report to the Court, stated the Charge which he had given to the Jury, and went into all the Proceedings at nisi grins. All this Discourse was calculated to serve other Purposes. With respect to the question before the Court, it was extrajudicial and improper,  --  as the Lawyers call it, he travelled out of the Record. I caught a hint of this Irregularity from Bearcroft one night at
a Tavern, and immediately drew up an Argument upon it in proper Form, and sent it to Calcraft, desiring him to transmit it to his Friend. Within three days after, I heard the great Earl of Chatham repeat my Letter verbatim in the House of Lords, not only following the Argument exactly, but dressing
it in the same Expressions that I had done. His Speech the next day flamed in the Newspapers, and ran through the Kingdom. Such were the Triumphs or Amusements of a Party that had almost all the Wit, and Popularity, and Abilities in the Kingdom to support them, but never could carry a question in either House of Parliament. I saw plainly that my Connections would
never lead me to any solid Advantage .... 1775, or till a Vacancy, of which there was no Expectation. Even then I must resign my place, and fight my Way to advancement with a broken and languishing Opposition. The Prospect
on every side was gloomy and dispiriting. From that time I never ceased to form Projects for quitting the War Office. India was the only Quarter where it was possible to make a Fortune, and this Way all my Thoughts were directed. They were rather Thoughts than Views, for I saw no Opening, and only Observation; and, by changing the Scene, helped to relieve my Thoughts. Calcraft agreed to join me at Naples in the Autumn. We parted with every possible Mark of Affection, never to meet again. The Journal of my Travels which is preserved among my Papers in England, contains little or nothing of Importance except a curious Interview with the Pope, Cranganelli. I wrote a particular Account of it to Doctor Campbell. Nothing could exceed the Courtesy with which his Holiness treated us; but there was no dignity in his deportment nor Judgement in his discourse. He seemed to have got a set of speeches by heart, calculated to please and flatter such Englishmen as went to see him. His Encomiums of the English Nation were too extravagant to be sincere. The scene however was curious, considering who were the parties, and deserved to be remembered.
To compleat my Afflictions I received an Account of Calcraft's Death, while I was at Naples. I knew what I had to expect and was not much disappointed at hearing that he had left me nothing but a thousand pounds, and an Injunction to his Trustees to bring me into Parliament for Wareham during the Minority of his Sons. Nothing could be more express than this Injunction, nor more explicit than the Eefusal of his worthy Representative to comply with it, when, before my departure for India, I called upon them to substitute Mr. D'Oyley during my absence. In this Instance they undoubtedly departed from the Intentions of the Testator, but they adhered scrupulously to his. While my Ruin was in suspence I had felt infinitely greater Distress of Mind than now when it was determined. Extremities, once clear and unavoidable, reduce a Man to take his Resolution, and the very Act of resolving gives Vigour to
the Mind.
After an Absence of five months, I returned to England, leaving my Companion at Paris. Constant Anxiety made me restless and impatient. The Place I was not in seemed always preferable to my Actual Situation. I felt that I was a burthen to my Friends as well as to myself. But the generous heart of
D'Oyley never failed me. He hardly had a Thought, a Word, or Action, that was not directed to do me Service. We immediately agreed that all former Schemes or Views, in the political line were to be buried in Oblivion; that my Certainty of a Seat in Parliament was to be made as public as possible, and in the
meantime that I was to. Soon after my return, I went to Bath to see and take a final leave of my good Father. A Succession of paralytic Strokes had gradually destroyed his Faculties, and ruined a noble Constitution. I found him reduced to a State lower than Infancy, and insensible even to the pleasure of seeing a Son he adored. May I never exhibit so melancholy a sight; or may they who behold me, look forward, as I do, with Tenderness and Sympathy, to their own decline, and to the possibility of a similar Misfortune! My Father died on the 5th of March 1773. I have kept all his Letters with several of my own, and earnestly desire that they may be preserved for ever in my Family. The Hopes of Employment were yet distant and uncertain. The Interval was to be amused, and if possible with Credit. Monsr de Pinto's Essay on Circulation had fallen into my hands abroad. I thought I might reap some Benefit from giving a Translation of it with Notes to the Public. I went over to the Hague in May to consult the Author, who received me with Transports of Joy. He was a perfect Atheist, with a most benevolent heart He was vain of his Book, but had no Notion of Fame, except that which he could enjoy in his Lifetime. I had
a Letter of Introduction from Lord Suffolk to Sir Joseph Yorke, the Prince of Coxcombs. It was the time of the Fair, so I passed a Week tolerably well between . . . Jews and Gentiles. The Work was nearly finished, when I was called upon to act. . . . Upon accepting my present Appointment, I surrendered all my Papers to Stephen Baggs, in whose name the Translation has been published. But neither this nor any other Occupation was sufficient to
defend me from Fits of Despondence. It was in vain to shut my Eyes to my Situation. Wherever I went or whatever I did, the Spectre haunted and pursued me. Mr. Alexander Mackrabie was lately returned from America. He had purchased a thousand Acres for me in Pennsylvania, where I meant to secure a retreat for myself or my Family, if ever England should cease to be the Seat of Freedom. The question, now seriously agitated in my Mind, was whether I ought not to transplant myself at once, and take Possession of this Establishment before my little capital was exhausted. This was actually the subject of a dismal Conversation between Mackrabie and me, on the fourth
of June, when we accidentally met a Gentleman in the Park, who informed me that John Cholwell, one of the intended Commissioners for India, had declined the Nomination. I immediately went to D'Oyley, who wrote to Grey Cooper. It was the King's Birthday and Barrington was gone to Court. I
saw him the next morning; as soon as I had explained my Views to him, he wrote the handsomest and strongest Letter imaginable in my favour to Lord North. Other Interests con tributed, but I owe my success to Lord Barrington. It was remarkably fortunate for me that Cholwell had deferred his
Resignation to so late a Day. The Regulation Bill had been some days before the House of Commons. If the Minister had had more time to look about him, I should probably have been defeated by some Superior Interest. He sent for me on Tuesday the 8th of June, and with a multitude of flattering Expressions desired my leave to recommend me to Parliament to be one of the Council General at Bengal, in addition to Mr. Hastings, General Clavering, Colonel Monson, and Mr. Barwell. From the Tenor of his Discourse I conceived an Idea of the intended Bill, very different from the Truth. I conceived that
we were to be armed with extraordinary Powers to correct enormous Abuses. If such Abuses did not exist, the Interposition of Parliament invading the positive Eights . . .. . . . Fortune, he was true to himself. Such a Man will be true to his friend. He cut his Throat a few months after I left England. This was the Effect of Distemper. When I see the Mind of such a Man so governed by his Body, what am I to think of the Machine!
Ten months elapsed between the passing of the Regulation Bill and our departure for India. A great part of this Interval was lost in mere Inactivity. The rest was employed in debates and Intrigues at the India House. The Duke of Richmond and George Johnstone, at the head of a numerous Party went every possible length to retard, embarrass, and disgrace us. In the Event, however, they wore out their real strength, by mixing Passion in their debates, where nothing but the public Good should have been profest, and by obstinately disputing little points. The numbers they shewed in the Ballot against General Clavering, plainly demonstrated the power of the Party, if they
had had prudence enough not to exert it but upon questions of Importance. In consequence of very injudicious Management, they were not able, at several of the last general Courts, to muster above thirty or forty voices, whereas, at the Ballot against General Clavering, they had voted above Three hundred.
The Duke was vehement and unguarded in his Speeches, but the Newspapers often attributed more to him than he said. Some Reflections on General Clavering's Character, supposed to have been delivered by the Duke, produced a Challenge from the General. The Challenge produced a disavowal of the Words. This Event did not tend to conciliate the affections of our Opponents.
On the other side, the Minister not only had not a Majority in the Court of Directors, but could not rely even upon the few, who professed to be attached to him. When those shameful Instructions were produced, on which I gave him my Opinion at large, he had not Interest enough to get them altered, and was afraid to bring the Affairs of the India Company again into Parliament.
Colonel Monson had private reasons of Disgust, and wished to get rid of the business at any rate. General Clavering appeared to be very uncertain whether he should act under such Instructions or not, and dropped hints of resigning. Lord North was equally weary of hearing objections, and alarmed at the stile in which they were made. Provided he could once dispatch us out of England, I believe he cared but little what became of us afterwards. To a man behind the Curtain, it is really pitiful to observe in what manner the affairs of a great Nation are conducted. At last, however, all Difficulties were surmounted, if
not removed;  --  that is, Objections, which could not be answered, were undervalued. The Solicitor General did not scruple to tell us that, in spite of our Instructions, when once we were in India, we might act as we thought proper; and indeed, it must be admitted, that, considering the uniform Conduct of the Company's former...
The Prospect now before the Governor General and Council of Bengal is by no means flattering. A great and important Trust appears to be reposed in us, when in fact, unless we hazard the Consequences of assuming an Authority which strictly does not belong to us, we do not within ourselves possess the
means of doing either Good or Evil. Since the Interposition of the Legislature was first deemed necessary to save the East India Company from ruin, the Powers, intended to be annexed to this Commission, have been so strangely qualified, corrected and reduced, not only by the Company's Instructions,
but by the King's Charter establishing a Supreme Court of Judicature at Fort William (of which, being an Act of the Crown, we have so much the greater reason to complain), that very little of the original Idea of Government, in altering the Constitution of the Company, seems to be left at present, nor is it easy to say what is the clear distinct Object of our Mission, or what is the Nature of the Services expected from us. We are to collect and manage the Revenues of Bengal; but the Board of Trade may draw every Rupee out of the Treasury; and the Court of Judicature, by awarding Damages to the Natives against our Collectors, may render it impracticable for us to collect the Revenues in the only way in which they ever were or can be collected in that Country. The other Presidencies are not to make War or Peace without our consent; yet a special Order from the Court of Directors makes that Consent unnecessary; and tho' it was evidently the view of the Legislature to unite the whole Force of the British Empire in India into one System of Policy, that wise
purpose will be defeated, whenever the opinion of the Court of Directors, with respect to the expediency of a Commencement or Cessation of Hostilities in any particular Presidency, shall differ from ours.
We are to reform abuses; yet, tho' we are the Executive Power of the State, there is a considerable number of the Company's principal Servants, whom, we have no discretionary Power to remove or suspend, and who may continue in Offices of high Trust, unless their Offences fall within the reach of the
Law, and can be proved according to the strict forms of a Court of Justice.
We are vested with the whole Civil and Military Power of Bengal, yet, by our Instructions we are confined to observe the strict Rule of Rank and Seniority in filling up all Vacancies whatsoever,  --  so that Parliament and the Company between them have constituted us a Government without the Power of
Rewards or Punishments. In the History of Mankind there is not an Example of such an Institution. We are the Executive Power of the State, yet the Power of reprieving or executing Convicts is lodged with the Court that gives the Sentence. We are not trusted with the Exercise of Mercy, possessed by our Predecessors. We can neither stop a Prosecution nor pardon after Conviction. Even the office of recommending to the royal Mercy is reserved to the Court of
Judicature. We are the Legislative Power of the State, yet, our Laws are
not valid, unless they are approved and confirmed by the Court of Judicature. The Wisdom of the English Constitution carefully separates the Judicial and Legislative Powers. In Bengal they will be in a great measure united in the same hands.
When we see the present Government of Bengal, which (considering the Occasion of its Appointment and the high Authority under which it acts), ought to have been invested with new and extraordinary Powers, in effect disarmed of those ordinary Powers which are incident and essential to the Constitution of every Government, it may be thought frivolous or superfluous to cavil at Regulations which seem only to affect our personal Consequence and Dignity. Yet since in all Countries, and in the East more especially, the Authority of the Ruler and the obedience of the subject depend much on Opinion, and since Opinion is chiefly determined by Appearances, we
have Reason, in a public view, to remonstrate against the Degradation we suffer by the Rule of Precedence established in the Charter of Justice.
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Judicature, who is not a member of the Council, immediately takes place of all those Persons, except the Governor, to whom the Regency of the Country is committed; and the same Pre-eminence is secured to the present Puisne Judges over those who shall succeed us in the Council. The natural Conclusion, in the Mind of the
Native, must be, that the Judicial is the first Power, and the Judges the first Persons in the State. This is not a principle admitted in any other Government; and least of all should it have been adopted in a Government, where the Executive Branch has in fact no real Power to compensate for a Diminution of Dignity and Appearance. But when all the objections to the plan and construction of the Bill are considered, I see none so powerful and judicious as one stated by the dissenting Lords, in their protest of the 11[th] of June 1773, viz. The person who drew up this protest, I presume, knew something more of Hastings and Barwell than we do. 
