London, April 4,1770
My dear Mac. -- We have a packet from New York with letters of the 21st and 22nd of February, but no advices from Philadelphia. You are so punctual a man, that when you fail to write, your friends are uneasy. I say this rather for the old people than myself. I am no way given either to ceremony or idle apprehensions. The enclosed newspapers will give you some idea of our present state of politics. The most material event since my last, is that Mr. Grenville's bill for regulating the mode of deciding contested elections has passed the House of Commons. They will now be determined by thirteen persons chosen by ballot, and sworn like a jury. This is supposed to be a great point gained against bribery and corruption, and mortification to the Ministry, who one night divided against it to no purpose. Au reste, they stand their ground,
and the King seems determined to support them. You have now got a Wilkes of your own at New York, so I suppose your zeal for our poor patriot will decline. He comes out (of
custody) on the 18th instant, but in my own opinion it makes no difference to anybody but himself.
My wife and children are pretty well. Your nephew promises to be a hero in the demolition of gingerbread. I am going to-night to sup at Tilman's chambers. He leads a pleasant sort of life, and studies the law like a dragon. His principles are truly patriotic, especially when in liquor.
I protest I have nothing more to say; but be so honest as to observe that I have written twice by a private ship, since the last packet.
And so farewell!
P. Francis
London, June 12, 1770
Dear Mac. -- Since my last, I have received your letters of the 10[th] of March and 25th of April. I do not think they contain anything that requires a more particular answer, than my thanks for your writing so constantly and so well. In the matter of the purchase I shall rely on Colonel Francis and yourself. If you both think it right to buy, I shall always be ready at the common notice of bills of exchange, to pay the money. The Princess of Wales is gone to Germany. She means to show the world that there is nothing in that pretended secret influence which has been so much talked of lately. It can hardly be a party of pleasure at her time of life, and many people think she will never return. If the opposition do not entirely succeed in all their designs, they have at least the pleasure of tormenting his most gracious Majesty most abominably.
Junius is not known, and that circumstance is perhaps as curious as any of his writings. I have always suspected Burke; but, whoever he is, it is impossible he can ever discover himself. The offence he has given to his Majesty and is more than any private man could support; he would soon be crushed. Almon has been found guilty of republishing the letter to the King, and Woodfall, who was the original publisher, is to be tried to-morrow. If he be found guilty, I fancy he will have reason to remember it. I have been a tour through Wiltshire, and as far as Bath, on horseback, and in company with Tilman. The more I know this youth, the better I like him. On Friday next your sister sets out for Margate, where she proposes to stay two months. They both want duckings -- I mean she and her daughter Bess. You have given me no orders for the
present lottery. If you like to have a ticket, I may hear from you before the drawing. Pray, Sir, have you any thoughts of returning to England? And so farewell!
Yours most faithfully,
P. Francis
My dearest Betsy, -- Not having any letter by the post, I flatter myself I shall receive one from you to-night by William. I saw the children this morning. Sally has had the toothache violently,
but by the help of a poultice she slept well last night, and is free from pain this day. Philip and the other two are as fierce as lions. Your mother was in bed. Patty has been bled; her blood is so bad that Price says she must be bled once a week for two years and some months.

June 19
My dearest Honesty, -- I wish you joy of your snug little dwelling. William knows something of houses, and says it was entirely to his satisfaction. I wrote to you yesterday, consequently have
not much to say at present. It rained bitterly all last night and this morning,  --  drop, drop, drop into my room last night. I wakened with the noise, and took it for thunder. We are all at
sea. If it holds up, I shall ride to Fulham this afternoon. I shall pay you a visit at Margate as soon as Lord Barrington goes out of town.
Margate, July 1, 1770
My dear Mac. -- I arrived at this enchanting place, to pay a visit to my wife and daughter Bess, who have been bathing in the ocean about a fortnight. I assure you this town is wonderfully improved since we saw it about five years ago: a fine assembly room, a good tavern, a coffee house, and a billiard table, to say nothing of the church, which, I observe, has been repaired and beautified. Yet after all, I doubt whether there be a more detestable spot in any part of the inhabitable globe. I have got a letter from our honest cousin Turbut, which it is absolutely impossible for me to answer by this packet, unless it should happen to be detained a fortnight
beyond its usual time. Pray tell him so, and that I am inexpressibly obliged to him for the trouble he has taken about the thousand acres. As to his other project, it has not been in my power to consult anybody yet, nor indeed, supposing it a thing advisable, do I know how to set about it: he talks of a tract of country, which upon the map appears equal to at least a third of Ireland, and he supposes that I have nothing to do but to ask and have. I wish that either he or you had been more particular. One thing I wish you to tell him directly -- viz. that instead of having a great deal of interest, as he seems to take for granted, I have really none at all. However, the land will not run away, and I must have time to make proper inquiries. By next packet, I shall answer him fully. Between ourselves, is this youth considered a visionary projector in the country, or have they any reasonable opinion of his discretion? I should also be glad to know what benefit I am to derive from my thousand acres. You, I presume, have not lived so long in the land market without making yourself a freeholder, and laying down some plan for a future estate. You give me a hint of your returning this summer, and I have kept it carefully to myself. How glad we
shall be to see you is more than I can conveniently put upon paper; for my time is short, and my paper almost out, and so, my dearest friend, farewell! We have a very agreeable hurricane here every night.
P. Francis

To Major Baggs.
London, December 11, 1770
A very odd thing happened yesterday in the House of Lords. The Duke of Manchester declared that he had a motion to make, and was very quietly explaining the ground and occasion of it, particularly the defenceless state of the nation. After he had been talking about a quarter of an hour, Lord Gower got up and interrupted him, saying that such matters were unfit to be divulged before so crowded an audience, and therefore insisted that his Grace should not proceed until the House was cleared. This motion was vehemently opposed by the Duke of Richmond; but the cry of clear the House increased to such a clamour and tumult, that nothing else could be heard. Upon this Lord Chatham got up and roared out that he wanted to speak to order, but not a syllable more could I distinguish. Since the damning of the French dancers I never saw such a scene. At last Chatham, finding it in vain to persist, marched out of the House in the true style of Secession, and was followed by all the minority lords, even the Duke of Manchester, who was to make the motion. Lord Mansfield, who sits as Speaker, did all he could to appease them, but to no purpose, and now they say those lords are preparing a flaming protest. The House of Commons immediately ordered all peers to be turned out of their House, for there was a
great number of commoners in the House of Lords when the affair happened.
The foregoing is by way of news, of which, and everything else, I hope you will make a discreet use. I had yesterday your letter from Plymouth, and am satisfied you have done all you could. With respect to your namesake George, depend upon it, if ever in my power -- at present I could as easily move Olympus: besides, in the present augmentation there will be but very few commissions to dispose of, for all the seconded officers are to be brought in, and great care to be taken of the half pay. I wish you a good voyage, and so farewell!
P. F.

London, February 12, 1771
My dear Brother, -- I really reproach myself with suffering two packets to depart without a letter to you. I cannot tell how it has happened; so without farther examination or apology, I shall hope
you will forgive me. At last we have something like a peace with Spain: how likely it is to continue, is another question. Our armaments, particularly of ships, seem to continue as vigorously as if war had been declared. In my own private opinion, the Spaniards always meant war; and we shall have it, as soon as they and the French are ready for us. You Americans will be losers by the bargain. In war we should probably have wanted your assistance, and yielded
to your own terms. But now you must submit. I cannot forgive your staying in America upon any principle but your making a fortune. One would think you might venture to give me a hint, or so.
Your father's letter, which I sent by the packet, will, I suppose, contain a true account of family matters. We are well. Your nephew is, without flattery, a most extraordinary child. His mind
and body seem to be everything we could wish. Tilman dined with me yesterday, and swallowed a moiety of two bottles of claret. I shall not be easily reconciled to his leaving old England. Tell his father and mother very seriously that it would be a pity to remove him so soon from his studies -- alias from Covent Garden. . . . You cannot conceive how close he applies. Your
old friend Meyrick, I hear, has espoused that young lady; and does business again. The rest of your acquaintance are pretty much in statu quo.
We lead a jolly kind of life. This night to a concert -- on Thursday to a ridotto -- on Saturday the opera -- and on Tuesday following a grand private ball at the London Tavern. We desire nothing
but that you were here to partake with us. Adieu!
P. Fr
Still, however, we thought a Spanish war inevitable: and that Chatham must be employed. Lord Weymouth, in that conviction, resigned the Secretary of State's office, and Host 500Pound in the stocks. By that loss, however, I gained knowledge enough of the mode of transacting business in the alley to deter me from entering into such traffic again.

London, December 7, 1770
Dear Phil. -- I wrote to you some days since at Cork. This morning I received yours of the 14th from Plymouth, and am very sensible of the truth of what you say. N.B. There are some subjects
which should not be trusted even to paper. Your observation in Italian is very just. The thing was entirely by the invention and impudence of the worthy Mr. Beau reste, let this subject never
be mentioned again until we meet. Nothing could be more hurried than the whole compilation.
I hope Martin will stand fast. You shall have the earliest notice.
Adieu! I am tired of wishing you a good voyage.
P. F.
War Office, January 29, 1771
Dear Phil. -- I am desired by my Lord Barrington to acknowledge your letter of the 11th instant, and to acquaint you that he thinks very favourably of your merit and services, and that he is well
inclined, upon all proper occasions, to serve you; but considering that you are one of the youngest majors he is of opinion that it would be an injustioe to majors of a longer standing, if the promotion in the 69th were, in this instance, to go in the regiment. So much for my office. My private interest is undoubtedly at your command; and if it ever does you or myself or anybody else any good we must have fortune on our side. I am overwhelmed with business; but your affairs are beyond any remedy from me, if I were to dedicate my whole time to them. I
have heard no more of Robinson. I saw Coombe this morning. He has been really very ill for several weeks, and I fear the accounts he has got of Martin are not likely to mend his health. He supposes Martin is out of town, for he has written and can get no answer. In his opinion and my own there is not the shadow of a chance. You will curse me for my intelligence, but what signifies concealment? I myself am hipped beyond measure, and indeed with too much
reason. Yet we are all well in Duke street. Wilkes and Horne have brought their villany and folly before the public; and this morning Macleane publishes a challenge which he sent to Wilkes
yesterday and which he says Wilkes positively refused. And so farewell; I have no comfort of any kind for you.
P. Francis

London, March 6,1771
Monsieur mon Frere, -- On Monday last I received your letter of the 4th of January. After all your Corte Venue, the bark that brings you to England will, I fancy, be of most use to you, at least in point of bodily health. Forgive the pun, it is a sin I am not often guilty of. But you are silent about your future plans for life. Have you any, my friend, or are you as much afloat as ever? I enquire with anxiety. There was a time when I thought there might be a turn of affairs which would enable me to serve my friend, but that prospect is vanished, and I fear there is no hope of its returning with substance. In my own place here, I am tolerably secure, and with this we must rest contented. Tilman almost lives with us. He is so much in fashion, that I have hardly an acquaintance who does not desire to see him whenever we are invited. Our friends in Bruton Street improve every day. We hardly ever meet, and I protest I cannot tell why, for I am no poorer than I was when their friendship was most ardent. My laying down the coach was prudence, not necessity; but they, I suppose, suspect the contrary. At any rate I know myself to be independent; and if it were otherwise, they are the last of the creation to whom I would yield a tittle. Yet my contempt for them is expressed with all the politeness imaginable. They shall have no hold to fasten an offence upon me. In the way of news I think we decline every day. The House of Commons are every day treated like an assembly of pick-pockets, and even the newspapers have lost their dignity. There was a great and sudden fall of the stocks yesterday, but I have not heard it accounted for upon any principles, but the usual roguery of the alley.
The whisper given about is, that the Duke of Choiseul is to be recalled, consequently an immediate war to be expected. But this I take to be nonsense. I shall be ready to honour your draughts. What do you propose to do with your own acres, and what would you advise me to do with mine? My love to Turbut. He has some reason to be discontented with me, but not so much as he imagines. Enforce the necessity of Tilman's staying here. Adieu!
P. F.
How did you Americans like Lord Chatham's speech? It was really genuine. Vale!

War Office, March 30, 1771
Dear Phil  --  I have had a dangerous fever, and am still very ill with a sore throat. Everything I see and hear discourages me even from hoping. If a fair opportunity presented itself for
the East Indies . Stephen left London without one word of communication with me, and is now in Sussex. Jack, I hear, plays the fine gentleman, and talks of marrying an heiress. The Lord
Mayor and Oliver are very much at their ease in the Tower. This is a very extraordinary event, but I do not perceive that it has any great effect. The King has been most abominably insulted in
returning from the House. I never saw such a concourse of people, nor such outrageous behaviour. Our opinions very much incline to the expectations of war.
The House of Commons seem afraid to meddle with Wilkes. TheCity are again to address for a dissolution.
Adieu.
P. F.

War Office, May 1, 1771
My dear Brother,  --  I fear I load you with postage inland, much more than my letters are worth; but this is an expense you must submit to, as long as you express satisfaction in hearing from me.
Long before this, I hope, your grievances have left you  --  I mean rheumatism and fever. You Americans have a wonderful turn to pains in the bones. If you have not made a thousand compliments to Tubby Francis for me upon his change of condition, you deserve to be hanged. I have used that honest fellow infamously; but really, between ourselves, I cannot prevail upon myself to talk to a man who makes so light of getting large provinces into his possession. For
God's sake take excellent care of my land! If I do not misunderstand you, you mean that it must take care of itself. I will either pay the money to your father, or otherwise, as you think proper. If
war had gone on, something might perhaps have offered for you. But have courage, we shall not always be at the foot of the ladder. I need not be at the toil of repeating newspapers. They will tell you enough of the feuds among patriots, and the progress of faction. The Committee of Privileges,1 made their report yesterday to the House, but have done no more. Nothing can be more ridiculous and disgraceful both to the Committee and to the House than this whole business. I shall not wonder at, though I have no sufficient reason to expect, a dissolution of Parliament, and a total change of hands as things now stand.  - ___  has a most uncomfortable time of it. Lord Chatham is to move to-morrow for an address to dissolve. Lord Halifax is either dead or dying: if he should survive he is to quit business. Wilkes will probably be sheriff. A great
event has happened in the history of the Macrabies. I have taken a little neat cottage at Fulham for the summer. Your father's letter I dare say will be full of it. We go on Saturday. I saw him this morning amazingly well. Your nephew is a most glorious animal, but not very like his uncle. Adieu.
Yours, P. Francis

London, May 30, 1771
Dear Phil.  --  My wife is greatly obliged to you for the honey, which I expect to receive shortly. At present it is in the act of performing quarantine. Rosenhagen, I hear, is returned to Lisle.
How he contrived to reach Lyons is to me inconceivable; and much more so, how he could have stretched to Gibraltar. Wilkes and Horne are at open war in the newspapers. Nothing can be more
contemptible, in my own opinion, nor less interesting than the whole of their correspondence. Horne's malice and rancour are mean and wretched beyond all description. He seems absolutely to Parliament. have lost his understanding. Rage blinds him, and I really suspect that the ministry pay him for what he does. The other rogue stands his ground, and I have no sort of doubt that he will be sheriff. What part do you think Rosenhagen would have taken between these worthies?
I have taken a little tenement about four miles from this office, where I live as much as possible. In the country everything pleases me: in town nothing.
Tilghman is well. He leaves us in September, and for ever. Fitzpatrick, he, and I, dine together to-day. Whenever we meet, we drink your health, and join in lamenting the condition of the times.
Adieu. P. F.

War Office, June 25, 1771
Dear Phil. -- You will hardly believe that the hint I threw out about the East Indies related to myself. The idea was carried pretty far, but circumstances being altered with respect to the plan
of government in India, that affair is over, and must never be mentioned. For the next three years I am likely enough to remain in my present state of uninteresting indolence. But I am secure of a in the next Your anxiety about politics is extraordinary enough. All I can say is, at present they look a little more lively than they have done for some time past. Horne, I think, is beaten out of the pit, and everything goes swimmingly for Wilkes and Bull. They had the whole show of hands for them yesterday at Guildhall, and the poll hitherto greatly in their favour. The numbers last night stood as follows: For Wilkes, 296 ; Bull, 276; Kirkman, 45; Plumbe, 34;
Oliver, 28. Yet it is by no means clear that Wilkes will ultimately carry it. The above numbers are nothing compared to the rest of the livery. In the meantime Wilkes and his people are in high
spirits. The Duke of Grafton, since his appointment to the Privy Seal, has had a peppering letter from Junius, who promises a continuance of his correspondence as long as he is in office. I will send you newspapers whenever an opportunity offers. Of changes I see no prospect. Wilkes may perhaps have the pleasure of being hanged before his shrievalty is expired. The City have resolved upon another remonstrance. The weather is uncommonly fine, and promises a plentiful harvest. Fitzpatrick, Tilman, Gravier and I dined yesterday at the Queen's Arms. They drank immoderately; even I, who drank nothing but thimblefulls, grew intoxicated at
last. Adieu. I will write to you as often as occasions of doing it without expense shall offer. For this you must pay. The accounts from Bath are truly melancholy. I expect every day to
hear of my father's death. Adieu.
Yours, P. F.
War Office, July 3, 1771
Dear Phil.  --  I wrote to you about a week ago by the land post, so have nothing new to communicate, beyond what you will find in this bundle of newspapers. Wilkes, I think, is more firmly upon his legs than ever he was.
Yours affectionately,
P. Francis

War Office, July 26, 1771
Dear Phil.  --  I have never missed an opportunity of writing to you, and have sent you horseloads of newspapers. Wilkes's success has established his interest in the City, and in my opinion he is in a higher style than ever. Junius has given Horne a most severe correction. The best on't is, that Junius, under pretence of writing Horne a primate letter, makes him the editor of the grossest
and most infamous libel that ever was printed. This I take to be a coup d'etat. Wouldn't you laugh if you saw the parson in the pillory for publishing a letter, in which he himself is virulently abused? Horne's credit is very low indeed. The plan for the City is to have Crosby Mayor again; but the livery must return two to the Court of Aldermen. Now, the way is to return one Bridgen with Crosby. NB. This Bridgen is the most scurvy rascal in the City, and particularly odious to the aldermen. It is not doubted that Wilkes will be Mayor the year following; otherwise we are all quiet. To-morrow morning, Godfrey, Tilman, another gent and I set out upon a tour through Derbyshire, and propose to reach Manchester. I wish you were of the party.
I am, dear Phil.,
Very truly yours,
P. F.
Derby, Tuesday even, July 30, 1771
My dearest dearest Betsy,  --  This is the only Christian-like looking town that I have seen since I left London, and we are just entered. Oar journey has been as prosperous as we could expect, though we have seen nothing yet but the bare face of the country. The Duchess of Bedford and be d -- d to her, would not let us see Wooburn Abbey, which we all greatly regret. The weather has been perfectly favourable, that is cool, even more so than I could have wished. I generally drive the chaise two-thirds of each stage, as my companions like riding, so that I have variety and no manner of fatigue. To-morrow we set out early for Chatsworth and the Peak.

Manchester, Saturday morning, August 4, 1771
This is just to inform you that we arrived here yesterday about 4. After dinner with much toil we found out Mr. Clough's, where we all supped, and I lay in the state bed. By the same token I am now writing in his best parlour. Oh! I wrote to you from Derby. We have been all through that county, and have travelled over a thousand mountains, to say nothing of caverns and precipices. But to say the truth everything has contributed to make it a pleasant journey. These good folks received me as the Jews intend to do the Messiah. To-morrow we set out on our return. Old mother though is as blind as a horse in a mill, and has a hand like a curry-comb. The girls are in raptures. And so deary, adieu! Kiss the children heartily, and place it to account as per advice.
Yours, P. Francis

War Office, August 20, 1771
Dear Phil. -- I have two letters from you from Lisbon, and this very morning a third of an earlier date from Gibraltar, in which you give me notice of your existence. This last was unnecessary, as I had no particular reason to question that you were alive. Some singular ill-fortune must have attended my correspondence, for really I have written to you as often as you could possibly expect or desire. I thank you for your very seasonable hint about J. A.,and yet, upon my honour, I do not recollect that I have anything to reproach myself with: I never told him so much as you have done  --  no, not by the most distant intimation, viz. my reason for desiring that translation. You are deceived in regard to his supposed simplicity. I wish you were equally mistaken in your opinion of his discretion. But enough: we shall be more prudent hereafter.
Junius and Wilkes seem to make common cause. Poor Horne is drubbed till he screeches for mercy. Never was there such a letter as Junius has nattered him with. All mankind agree that it is his masterpiece, and now I hope we shall never hear any more of them. We have no alterations of any kind. I send you newspapers as often as I can, and hope to-morrow to send you a great bundle. Of Stephen I hear nothing. Godfrey, Tilman, and, I returned last Monday from our grand tour. Tilman takes his leave of us in a few days for America, and for ever. My wife and children are your humble servants. If you reproach me any more with not writing, you are an ungrateful demon; this is the fourth which you have not acknowledged.
And so farewell!
P. F.
War Office, August 22, 1771
Dear Phil.  --  I wrote to you last Tuesday very fully by the common post, as I have done several times, though you continue to reproach me with neglect. I now take the opportunity of Lieutenant Hoy of the 39th to send you newspapers. You will find the famous Junius among them, but you ought to read Horne's letter first. I cannot say I am much edified with your trip to Lisbon, and leaving the regiment without a field officer -- not that I care a farthing about the discipline. Tilman, I hear, goes for his native country on Saturday. I am to eat my parting dinner with him to-day. Adieu.
P. F.

War Office, September 4, 1771
My dear Mac.  --  I have duly received all your letters, though I have them not before me to acknowledge them by the dates. I really have scarce time to perform the common offices of nature; and if writing to my best friend were as natural to me as eating or sleep I must either do it at unseasonable hours, and in a slovenly manner, or give it up entirely. Perhaps it will be some amends to you to say that you live in my thoughts. I see how uncomfortable your undecided situation must be, but upon this subject it is impossible for me to say anything to the purpose. If you could form such commercial connexions in North America as would enable you to act upon your own account, I should think it not impracticable to raise a sum of money for you on this side, to begin upon. Your father's letter, which goes herewith, will naturally be filled with
the departure of our good friend Tilman. He breakfasted with me for the last time, Wednesday the 28th of last month, and was to get into his postchaise at four o'clock that afternoon. Our parting was no other than if we were to dine together the day following; yet I shall probably never see him again. I do not think that as to the choice of friends or companions, it is an easy matter either to please my fancy or to satisfy my judgment. The villain succeeded in both completely; and now I ought to hate him heartily for giving me such cause of regret as will last as long as I live. He is to write to me constantly, but, at this distance and with this prospect, it will be the dead letter, which he has been studying so long. You are fortunate in waiting for his return to America. We are all pretty quiet here, but it seems to me rather an anxious pause
or interval in contention, than the tranquil security of a wise and firm government. Tilman is loaded with politics and can explain everything as well as I can; I begin now to think that some
discovery will be made about Portsmouth fire. The Duke of Gloucester is gone to Lisbon.
Tilman will tell you wonders of my children, particularly your nephew.
Adieu, adieu!
P. Francis

Bath, December 23, 1771
My dearest Wife,  --  I have got your two letters this morning, and pity you from the bottom of my heart. This bleeding I hope will have a good effect. Let me know constantly how you go on. There is nothing in this place to give me the smallest pleasure. My father may hold it out for years in this deplorable condition, or he may die to-morrow. Mr.D'Oyly has resigned; but of this say nothing. In short I am a little heartsick. Pray tell my dear girls that I am infinitely proud of their behaviour. I shall write again to-morrow.
And so for the present farewell.
Yours, yours,
P. F.

Bath, December 24, 1771
My dearest Betsy,  --  It is not that I have anything to add to my letter of yesterday, but a letter is comfort to you, and I am afraid you want it. My father was well enough this morning to go abroad in a chaise. But he relapses frequently, and is truly in a deplorable condition. He is hardly sensible of my being here; and if I did not live cheap, and did not expect Mr. Godfrey, I would return many days sooner than I intended. I have dined but once at a tavern, and have never supped out. I am very uneasy about the dear children, and much more so about you. It is hard that you should have so unpleasant a Christmas; but have a good heart, and I'll take care
you shall have a merry new year. I flatter myself your brother will be in London in a fortnight. I was invited to dine to-day with a riotous party, but did not like it, so dine at home alone; and
Mrs. Walsh has sent me a ticket for a concert: so I take my music and my nourishment gratis. I am very impatient to hear what Lord Barrington has determined about the War Office. I neither
expect nor desire any alteration in my own situation. Very likely Mr. Bradshaw may succeed. I am afraid my poor friend Walsh is very unhappy. She has represented their melancholy state to me with tears, and would gladly retire to any farm to avoid Bath'. But this is impossible. I have just swallowed an excellent fowl and roast chine, and now drink your health, and all that's dear to us at Fulham.
And so, Honesty, adieu!
P. F.

War Office, March 20, 1772
Dear Sir, -- My Lord Barrington has desired me to answer a letter of yours, dated the 7th of last month. The subject of it is rather of a delicate nature, and a formal official answer might be liable to inconvenience. It is very much his lordship's desire that every recommendation given in by the Colonel to the Staff Commissions, might be with the concurrence and approbation of the commanding officer. At the same time his lordship cannot question the propriety of the
Colonel's recommendation. The Secretary at War receives it in course of his office, and lays it before the King, who considers the Colonel as the best judge of the qualifications of the officer whom he recommends to his Majesty. In one article I must set you right.
You seem to apprehend that the commission of Adjutant is not saleable; but in fact there is no order to prevent its being sold where the possessor was a purchaser.
I am, dear Sir,
Your most obedient humble servant,
P. Francis
Rome, October 17, 1772
Dear Sir,  --  At last I have an opportunity of keeping the promise you were so kind as to exact from me, when I left England. I have not been unmindful of my engagement, but I wished to perform it a little more to your satisfaction, than by a detail of the ordinary occurrences of a journey, or the common observations of travellers. You are not to be entertained with the rattling of French roads, the famine of an Italian inn, or the velocity of postilions within a given time. As for pictures and statues, I have really seen so many that I remember nothing. In a very large mixed company, one seldom contracts a lasting acquaintance. Neither would my advice be of
much use to you, for I fancy at present you have no thoughts of travelling. But, my good and worthy friend, I have the pleasure of thinking that I can meet you upon your own ground, upon your favourite topic, a great and good prince who does honour to a throne. I know to whom this glorious character most eminently belongs. Yet, trust me, there are princely virtues on both sides the Alps. The present Roman pontiff is worthy of his station. He had no family connexions, he had no private interest nor foreign protection, and circumstanced as the affairs of the Holy See then were, it was impossible for him to have been Pope if he had not deserved it. Yet it is not his personal merit I admire so much as the ready concurrence of so many rivals to acknowledge and reward it. The success of his administration he piously attributes to the goodness of Providence. His modesty will not suffer him to insist upon the influence of second causes. As to matters of religion, I would not debate the point with him. In worldly affairs, I believe we may affirm that common men are not usually the instruments of wise councils or of important events. At his accession to the pontificate, he found the affairs of the Church in the utmost disorder. Portugal
totally alienated; France dissatisfied; Spain little less than hostile; and Naples actually in arms upon the frontier. Scarcely had he reigned a twelvemonth, when everyone of these untoward circumstances was reversed. I ask no other proof of the wisdom of his councils. As for his personal deportment, I can affirm from experience that it corresponds with his public character, and contributes to adorn it. A great man preserves his dignity, even when he wishes to lay it aside, and discovers the force of his abilities while he seems to make no use of them. The bow is unbent, but we may judge how far it carries. After seeing the Laocoon, Meleager, and Apollo, the next thing to be seen was the Pope. We had heard that Englishmen were well received by him. His Holiness takes every opportunity of honouring them with the most distinguished marks of his regard. This condescension of course encourages them to wait upon him; and even
without it, I think it would be absurd to see Rome and not to visit the head of the Roman Catholic Church. His Holiness being in the country it was necessary to send beforehand, to know at what time we might be admitted to his presence. This part of the business was arranged for us by Abbe Grant, to whose friendship and politeness we are much indebted. An answer was quickly returned, that the Pope would be happy to receive us whenever we should do him
that honour, for so he was pleased to express himself. The day before yesterday we accordingly set out for Castello Gandolfo, under the auspices of our friend the Abbe. The Master of the Ceremonies happening to be out of the way, we were obliged to wait about twenty
minutes in an antechamber, for which his Holiness condescended to make us a multitude of excuses. The moment he knew we were arrived, he ordered us to be admitted, and received us at the door of his chamber with an exclamation expressive both of satisfaction and goodwill. I never saw a more venerable nor a more benevolent countenance, yet not unmixed with keenness and sagacity. Instead of permitting us to observe the usual ceremony of kissing his slipper,
he insisted upon our sitting down by him upon a little sopha, a distinction of which we are assured there never was an instance before. Our introducer, who has been accustomed to see English gentlemen well received, was at least as much astonished as we were at finding
himself seated in the Pope's presence. In a moment his Holiness began the conversation, with the utmost familiarity and good humour; and as it was my chance to sit very close to him, he frequently laid his arm upon my shoulder, and always called me caro mio figlio. This, and cari miei signori, was his constant address to us both. But whatever he said or did was accompanied with an ease and cheerfulness, that without lessening the reverence due to so great a person banished all restraint. His discourse was rapid, and included a variety of topics; yet there was none upon which he seemed to dwell with greater pleasure than upon his esteem and affection
for the British nation. I acknowledged how much we were obliged to him for this favourable opinion, but he insisted vehemently that we were only obliged to ourselves; that his regard for us was well known, and that he was pleased the world should take notice of it. He informed us that the Venetians, having lately doubled the duty upon English salt-fish imported into Venice at second hand from CivitaVecchiaand Ancona,and havingfound themselves disappointed
in the produce of that duty, had accused him of having formed a commercial treaty with Great Britain; and that his nuncio at Cologne, having asked leave to visit England last summer incognito, it had been industriously reported that his Holiness had sent him thither upon some special commission. He laughed heartily at these reports, and wished they had been better founded. He assured us that if he had been Pope in the time of Harry the Eighth, he would have prevented that unfortunate separation of England; that Clement the Seventh was a weak man, and duped by Charles the Fifth; and Wolsey a man of abilities, but blinded by his ambition; that the same temper and moderation on the part of the Holy See, which had lately recovered Portugal, would probably have preserved England. On his mentioning Portugal, I took the liberty of telling his Holiness, that I was at Lisbon when Cardinal Aiaccioli was so disgracefully dismissed, and that I had the honour of being known to the Marquis of Pombal. This circumstance seemed to lead his Holiness to enter largely upon the late reconciliation with that court. His management of it undoubtedly does him honour. It was the first measure of his government, and the success of it has fully answered the rectitude and piety of his intentions. He said that the instructions
given to Cardinal Aiaccioli were certainly injudicious, and that the Cardinal's zeal in carrying them into execution was, in his opinion, rather more to be commended than his discretion. That, upon his accession to the Pontificate, the first object he aimed at was to reconcile Portugal to the Holy See. That he immediately appointed Monsignor Conti (a name highly grateful to that nation) to be his nuncio to the court of Lisbon, and had given him no other instructions
whatsoever, but to carry with him Galateo and the Decalogue. (You may not know perhaps that Galateo is a book much esteemed here for the rules it contains of civility and politeness.) That his letter to the Marquis of Pombal was cordial and unaffected; reminding him of his former attachment to the interests of the Church, when he was minister at Vienna, and expressing a confidence in his piety, and in his well-known zeal for the support of the Catholic religion; that
if the King of Portugal wished for the nomination of a cardinal, he was ready to grant it; and that, in short, he desired a reconciliation with the court of Lisbon, upon no other conditions, but such as might best express his paternal tenderness and affection for his most faithful Majesty. This language, said his Holiness, came directly  from my heart, and it pleased God to give it success.
If I were to repeat to you the many just observations he made upon this event, as well as upon the means he constantly employed to maintain a good understanding and correspondence with the
Princes of the House of Bourbon, I should write you a letter too long for an ambassador. As there was no formality, so there was no exact order in his discourse. The most serious parts of his conversation were mixed with expressions of personal kindness and attention to us his humble audience. He spoke of the Duke of Gloucester with tenderness and regard, and seems sensibly touched with the acknowledgments his Royal Highness had made him of the civilities he had received at Rome. He also mentioned a late Declaration, but in the most moderate and guarded terms. From these subjects he descended to enquire how we had passed our time at Naples and Rome, where we dined, and what was our plan of amusement for the day. We told him we had provided a dinner, and meant to eat it at a Franciscan convent in the neighbourhood. He then was pleased to conduct us through the apartments of the castle, opened all the casements himself, and pointed out to us the most striking parts of the prospect. At parting he attended us to the outer door of his apartments, gave us his benediction, and said that, being in the country, he was sorry he had nothing to offer us by way of ricurdo or token of remembrance. After a short walk
we returned to the convent, and found that he had sent us six bottles of Burgundy, and a large pasticcio from his own table. The good Franciscans omitted nothing in their power to show their hospitality, nor were they unwilling to drink long life to their holy Father in his own wine; but this with moderation. Our obligations to his Holiness were not to end here. In going to Castello our axletree unfortunately broke. We had it patched up, but it broke down again within a hundred yards of the castle. There was no remedy but to apply to the Pope's Master of the Horse for a carriage to convey us to Rome. He asked his Holiness's permission, and it was granted immediately with a readiness to which I should be far from doing justice if I called it only polite.
This letter you may consider as an involuntary effusion of gratitude for favours great and unmerited. I expect that you will share with me in the pleasure of this day. It was a pleasure not only high in degree, but of the purest sort, for it was unattended with regret. Though not a convert to the doctrines of this Church, I am a proselyte to the Pope. Whoever has the honour of conversing with him will see that it is possible to be a Papist without being a Roman
Catholic. I will not conclude without a formal protest against your taking the trouble of answering this letter. I know your punctuality in these matters; but I also know how much better and more usefully you are employed. In publico, commoda peccem. A line from my old friend and fellow-labourer, to acknowledge the receipt, will be quite sufficient. He will be so good as to direct it to the care of Messieurs le Coulteux, at Paris. In a few weeks I promise myself
the pleasure of seeing you. My friend James, by whom I wish to be kindly remembered, is a ready penman, and will give me the news of the day. I have not been long enough out of England to be indifferent about politics. I beg of you to present my best compliments and sincerest good wishes to Mrs. Campbell, and that you will believe me, with truth and affection,
Yours,
P. Francis
P.S. To show you that I have not travelled over classic ground without improving my faculties, I send you an epigram, of my own conception, upon a marvellous antique lion in the Medici palace. Modern lions are mere whelps to him. This, I take it, is a performance that would do no dishonour to the pen of Scriblerus. But, good or bad, I am sure you would forgive the poetry if you saw the subject of it. The sight of such an animal inspires nothing but fear.


