LETTER IV
March 23, 1774
SOME theorists make a proposal to allow the Americans a representation in the British parliament, in order to justify our taxation of them; but from the small number of such representatives, which I have understood to be proposed, and their being restricted from voting, as some would have them, in any but American questions, I should fear that this proposal proceeded from a sense of shame, as not appearing to preserve even the common forms of justice, rather than from a strict and sacred regard to justice itself; or on a supposition, that this representation should be an adequate one, how would it be possible for the American representatives to serve their constituents in a proper manner. Could they, during every recess of parliament, visit their respective counties, as the members can in Great Britain? Could they, by a
post letter, in a day or two, communicate to, or receive from, their constituents all necessary intelligence? or, Could they meet and consult with them on all emergencies at a short notice? Must they reside a thousand or fifteen hundred leagues from their estates and compting-houses, in order to serve their country in parliament? Surely so weak a system of government must have been the visionary suggestion of a dream! But we may rest assured, that while the Americans are themselves awake, they will never consent to it. Will they trust their property, their freedom, their dearest rights, their every thing, in the hands of exiles, sent half-way to the Antipodes, in order to sit in council for their government! sent to reside in a luxurious, extravagant country, immersed in dissipation and corruption, and exposed to every temptation to betray them ! Believe me, they are not so senseless. In the imaginations of these visionaries, the vast Atlantic is no more, I presume, than a mere ferry.
   Those who have thought proper to indulge themselves in the way of declamation, tell us of the mighty things done for the Americans by the mother country, and make a great cry of their rebellion and ingratitude. Nay, they are silly enough to urge these obligations as so many irrefragable reasons why the Americans are bound to obey the British parliament: on this foundation they build our right of sovereignty. But whoever heard of a suit prosecuted in any English court of justice for ingratitude? Is a frugal son, out of his little competency, and to the prejudice of his own children, obliged, by any law of England, or of nature, to minister to the extravagancies of a proud, luxurious parent, and in what degree that parent shall direct? Do the obligations of friendship deprive the person obliged of his future freedom and independency? Doth not an attempt to enslave, cancel; in a moment, every former obligation? These declaimers should keep in mind, that voluntary good offices are moral and religious, not civil or political, obligations. We may safely admit the whole catalogue of them in their full force, without thereby affording parliament the most shadowy pretension to the rights of sovereignty over the Americans: but, in justice to the character of that people, we must positively deny their existence; for they have been amply repaid in a profitable commerce to this country. Men must surely be lost to a sense of common decency, who would impose upon us as truth, that the part which government hath ever taken, in settling and assisting the American colonies, was solely or primarily to benefit the settlers; whereby they have been laid under this vast load of obligation to the mother country, which nothing less than a surrender of their liberty can conceal. Every honest, unprejudiced man, who will reason, and not t wrangle, must acknowledge, that government's first object was, as indeed it always ought to be, to extend the commerce of this kingdom. This was the end: the countenance and assistance given to American settlers, was only the means, and therefore could be no more than a secondary consideration. When the colonies were in danger of falling a prey to France, was it pure affection and generosity' towards them, or jealousy of that ambitious power, which caused Great Britain to take up arms? Did not her own existence depend on the preservation of her American colonies? so that, though we do not mean to say affection, for her kindred had no share in moving her to draw her sword, yet, we presume, it will be admitted, that her own safety, her own interest, her own honour, were the only motives that could have engaged her to proceed such lengths at that juncture; and this will the more evidently appear, when we consider, that according to her notions of her right to the sovereignty, she saw the protection of her colonies, literally in the light of defence, and the more heartily undertook it accordingly. Surely, it must be a very bad title to dominion, which is built upon, an error of her judgment, and apolitical selfishness. Had the Hanoverians, or Dutch, the Prussians, Portuguese, or Hungarians; had even the very French, with whom she fought, at that time stood in the place of her American colonies, she would, on the same principles, have been as lavish of her blood and treasure in their support, as every one of them hath heretofore experienced; and yet our opponents in argument, would not have maintained, that services of this kind, done to any such state, would have entitled this kingdom to the same right
of ruling and of taxing it, as they contend for upon the same principle in the cafe of America. America, therefore, is not ungrateful; but is not rather Great Britain unwise, ambitious, and tyrannical? The obligations, in fact, were mutual, and as equivalent as the nature of things would admit; so that it would be a very nice, perhaps an impossible, but certainly an useless speculation, to decide which party hath been most benefited. The attempt is insidious, and he who makes it, is no friend either to America or Great Britain. 
   Many definitions of government have been given us, and a multitude of arguments employed, in order to shew the well-known necessity of one central supreme power being somewhere lodged in every empire, which shall be all sufficient of itself to perform the whole of legislation, and consequently taxation, as an essential part of it. But this will make nothing for the claims of parliament to the sovereignty of America. On the reverse, it only points  out more strongly the error which most people have fallen into in their notion of the British empire. They will have it, that the British empire comprehends within it all his Majesty's dominions in America; whereas the American governments, except that of Newfoundland, are independent nations, having within themselves the rights and the actual powers of legislation, which cannot be taken from them, and lodged in the hands of British legislators, without a manifest wrong, and the subverting of so many free governments. Here we shall be told, that our Kings, in granting them their original charters and privileges, only exercised a prerogative which they derived from the constitution; wherefore the Americans are still dependent upon, and owe allegiance, not, to the King alone, but to the state of Great Britain. But still
I maintain, that the inherent rights of mankind, above all, their freedom, are not to depend on casuistical niceties and logical distinctions, (which, by the way, must be false, when they would disprove these rights) but are theirs independently of all the Kings, all the governments in the universe. Kings and constitutions of government are the creatures, not the creators, of these rights. They are held immediately of God himself, who gave them. Had the original charters to the American settlers been granted on the express and sole condition of acknowledging the sovereignty of parliament, even all that would
not have bettered our present title one jot; for freedom, notwithstanding all that sophistry may say to the contrary, cannot be alienated by any human creature; much less can he enslave his posterity; and, therefore, such a contrast could only be binding, so far and so long as freedom should not be infringed by it; but, with regard to a virtue in it, of depriving a future people, many nations, of their freedom, it would be null and void in its own nature to all intents and purposes ; and, 'tis a mockery to our common-sense, to plead it as an authority to this end.
   It is a mistaken notion, that planting of colonies, and extending of empire, are necessarily one and the same thing. Even the intention of the planters will not make it so, where the rights of mankind, and the nature of things are not adapted to it; where growing colonies are so situated and so circumstanced, that, in the nature of things, they cannot be governed by the parent state on the principles of justice and freedom; it is surely paying little respect to our understandings, and shocks every feeling of a free mind, to assert, that they must nevertheless submit to its oppressive rule. Having denied that America, when we drop the popular language, and speak correctly, is a part of the British empire, it will naturally be expected I should  say what are, and where are its limits. The British empire, then, I hold to be confined to the British
Isles, and to the various settlements and factories of our trade in the different parts of the world, including the government of Newfoundland; together with the garrisons of Gibraltar and Minorea. As to the West India islands, they, as well as the continental colonies, certainly have a right to their independency, whenever they shall think proper to demand it, as they contain within themselves every necessary of legislation; but, if it be their choice, to acknowledge the sovereignty of the British parliament, as I apprehend it may, because, I believe, it will be their interest, I see no objection in that case to its being exercised. If it be true, as I believe all writers agree, that they would be depopulated, was it not for annual supplies of white men as well as blacks, this, and some other arguments, .drawn from West Indian manners and sentiments, seem to indicate, that it is not in their nature, nor perhaps in their wish, to support an independency; nor ought we to forget, that their soil itself points out to them dependency, supplying only the means of effeminacy, luxury, and intoxication, while for bread, and the necessaries of life, its inhabitants must depend upon other countries. It matters not how much, in the nature of trading settlements, our first colonies might have been, (though were not in fact) nor at what period they might be said to become independent nations: It matters not that they were originally planted and protected by the
government of this country, (I admit this planting; I make no reservation of those who fled from persecution and want) nor what were the intentions of government in so doing ; for, having in them (the people of those colonies)
the inherent and unalienable rights of freemen, they had therein the rights of independency, whenever they should think proper to assert them. Doth a man, who furnishes a young indigent relation with every necessary, who settles
him in a trading accompting-house, who supplies him with money, and supports him with every species of protection whereby he prospers in the world, and raises a fortune; doth the man, I say, to whom he owes all this,
obtain thereby a right, a legal title, to lake from him, without his consent, a single shilling of this fortune? men 0f slavish principles would have us believe, that the rights of private persons, of subjects, being mean and insignificant considerations, are level with the capacities of, and may be comprehended by the people; but that the sublime and mysterious rights of empire are only to
be judged of, and determined upon, by those who govern, and by those to whom these mysteries are confidentially revealed, in order to be treated of with due profundity and unintelligibility, not to enlighten the people, but to impress them with a proper respect for things so aweful and sacred. True enough it is, that what hath too frequently been written concerning them, hath not been level with the capacities of the people, nor with any other capacities; for no man can understand what hath no sense or meaning, what is palpable nonsense. 

LETTER V
March 26, 1774
IT is demanded, with an air of confidence and imaginary triumph, "Were not the first settlers in America British subjects? Did they not settle under the sanction of grants and charters? Hath not the kingdom, at all times, put itself to great expences in their support, and favoured them with many peculiar advantages in trade? Was not the last most expensive war undertaken solely on their account? Can any one be so absurd, as to imagine the kingdom intended to nurse and erect so many independent nations, instead of enlarging her own dominion? Ought not the Americans to repay us part of the expences of the war in particular, in order to enable us to discharge some part of that enormous debt it occasioned? and contribute their proportion towards the general expences of the whole empire?" To most of these questions, my arguments have already answered. Now, let me ask, in my turn, Have any of the nations, of the earth, especially the free ones, become what they are, in, consequence of the intentions, and by a regular plan for that purpose; of the governments of those countries from which they are respectively descended? When we speak of the Greeks as an Egyptian colony, or of the Carthaginians as a colony of Pnœnicians, do we the less consider them as free nations? or imagine that the mother-countries had a right to govern or to tax them, because the first settlers had once stood in the relation of subjects to those states? Let the intention of government, in planting a colony, be what it may, 'tis impossible it should take away an inherent unalienable right; such, for instance, as freedom. But what Britain principally intended, she hath certainly obtained -- an extension of commerce.  Again, let me ask, hath not Providence usually carried on its gracious designs of making great nations, and peopling
new regions, contrary to the councils of the wise ones of this world? While we are plotting and contriving, toiling and sweating, treating and waging war, in order to gratify our own self-interest and pride, by extending our commerce, and enlarging our empire beyond all bounds, Providence takes care to frustrate our foolish and wicked projects, and often brings about the reverse
of what we think to insure by the depth of our policy, and the strength of our arm. Let us take care that we do not provoke it to make us a scorn and approach to America, instead of' its arrogant ruler. By adhering strictly to the principles of justice, and the rights of mankind, we may firmly unite and cement together our own interests with those of our sister nations in America, and remain ourselves to the end of time, a powerful and independent state: but let us dread, by a violation of these sacred duties, to pull down upon our devoted heads the mighty ruins of an over-grown empire. Let it be the
peculiar glory of this free, this enlightened, this christian kingdom, to extend the influence of her religion and laws, not the limits of her empire! Nor let her entertain one anxious thought concerning the hackneyed notion of the progress of empire westward. Who are these presumptuous unsolders of the decrees of fate, these revealers of the hidden councils of God, that doom Great Britain to a speedy fall, when empire shall have fixed it's seat in America? Are the dispensations of Divine Providence so uniform and regular, as to become the object of science and proud philosophy?  --  to be foretold by man, or calculated like the movement and appearance of a comet? Our philosophical prophets pretend to judge from similar causes producing similar effects: but they ought to know, that in all essentials, there is yet very little or no similitude between the state of Great Britain and any antient empire
whatever: and I am not without faith, that there will always be wisdom and virtue enough in this happy island, to prevent its ever coming within that predicament. It behoves her, however, for instruction, to have a constant
retrospect to them and their fate. Let her maturely reflect on the insatiable avarice and ambition, the enormous, the gigantic wickedness of bloody Rome. Let her consider also the Grecian, the Persian, and Assyrian empires, and
carefully mark the grand causes of their overthrow. They were all erected on the rotten foundations of Idolatry and tyranny, (the very feed-plots of hell) they all fell the victims of their own mad ambition, and a lust of rule, that
nothing could satiate less than the dominion of the whole earth. Where is the similitude! Our religion, being a divine revelation, is confessedly perfect; and the law of nature, no less divine, being the immoveable basis of our  political fabric, the very foul of our constitution, this also is perfect. I say perfect, absolutely perfect; for whenever it hath the appearance of being otherwise it
is only from the want of a right interpretation, or a close adherence to its true principles. It is this immutable, this divine standard, we have to refer to in all our deviations, that hath preserved our constitution through all ages, and improved it till it is become the admiration and envy of all nations. This is a principle of renovation and recovery from all corruption and decays; this is a 
principle of immortality! No other constitution ever had the same, or at least never preserved it until it was sufficiently understood, and properly valued by the people. This has, under a most singular Providence, been our peculiar blessing. I trust it will be the blessing of our posterity to the latest generations; and that, when we shall have given birth, and the birthrights of freemen, to as
many independent states as can find habitations on the vast American continent, that Britain still will be great and free; the respected mother, the model, the glory of them all! and I will, I must indulge the fond hope, that the pure religion, and the perfect constitution of Britain, will gradually spread themselves over all America; and in every other part of the globe; so enlighten and operate upon the minds of men, as to become the chief instruments in
the Hands of Almighty God of bringing about, in his due time, that universality of Christianity, that harmony and happiness among the nations of the earth, which are intimated in the prophetic writings. Those prophetic intimations themselves, the peculiar fitness of the causes to the effects, together with a great variety of circumstances, that seem evidently tending towards this point, convince me, that it may be rationally hoped for; while all the arguments brought to shew the probability of America becoming the seat of a mighty conquering empire, to which Britain shall, in length of time, be a province, appear to my apprehension, to be destitute of any foundation of the smallest degree of probability. 
   We are told, that empire hath been observed to make its progress westward; that every empire hath had its infancy, its youth, its vigour, its declension, its death; and that they necessarily follow each other with the same certainty as in frail life of man; and lastly, we are reminded, that Great Britain hath past her meridian, and empire is now rising fast in Americas. To the first, I answer, that empire must needs have travelled westward from its source, except Europe had remained a desert; that it also travelled East, South, and North, as well as West, witness China, Indostan, Abyssinia, Russia; and that it hath already been in America, witness Peru and Mexico; and that it hath also taken retrograde courses, witness Turky and the Persian empire under Nadir Shah; and with regard to modern Europe, I can see no probability why it may not remain to the end of time, divided in proportions, not much differing from the present. To the second argument, I have only to say, that analogical reasoning is always very fallacious, and that there is no analogy between things mortal and immortal: To the third, I must repeat, that Great Britain, having in her constitution the principles of renovation and recovery from corruption and decay, and the feeds of immortality (which no other state ever had) is in no great danger of a declension, so long as this world is likely to last; and that the
British North American states having, all of them, Christianity void of persecution, as a light from heaven; British freedom as a soul, and a spirit of commerce as the breath of life; it must be thought next to an impossibility
that any one of them should ever swallow up all the rest, and then extend its conquests beyond the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The times for "heroes and demi-gods" are past; and the phrenzy for universal empire is somewhat out of date and out of countenance. They prevailed, and only could prevail, when the minds of men were in a proper tone for such extravagances; when the
advantages of commerce, the true principles and ends of government, and the religion of peace and pure virtue were either wholly or very imperfectly known: besides, no searcher into prophecy hath yet discovered in the womb
of time, an empire that is to be so formidable to the liberties of the world; and, if it be true, that the species, as well as the individual of mankind, obtains knowledge, wisdom, and virtue progressively; its latter days will, according to the nature of things, and by means of the Divine assistance that hath been vouchsafed it, to all appearance, be more wise, peaceable, and pious, than the earlier periods of its existence. To this end let every one labour; and his own happiness at least, if not the general happiness of mankinds will most assuredly be his reward.


