LETTER I
March 20, 1774
EVEN the most ignorant perceive this to be a crisis of the utmost importance to Great Britain, and to North America: but it doth not appear that the most sage have yet formed a plan of proceedings that is likely to give content to both parties. With deference to the sentiments of others, and with a sincere desire of rendering a service to my country, permit me to offer a few thoughts on the subject, and to throw some hints in your way, which I do not perceive to have been as yet started by any political writer. It is most deeply to be lamented, that passion and prejudice, pride and self-interest, have evidently too much influence over the minds of most men, to suffer them to decide impartially and
equitably in such delicate conjunctures as the present. We want now to discover, and to establish a principle of lasting union between our colonies and the mother country; while the measures of administration, the deliberations in parliament, the sentiments of political writers, and the language of the people at large, all tend to prove, that the most probable event will be mutual jealousy, animosity, and strife. It is the misfortune of this country, surely without necessity, that schemes of reformation, and plans of a great and comprehensive nature, for the general benefit of the people, are rarely or never formed before-hand in the peaceful closet of a provident minister; and, it is as unusual for them to attain their completion by dispassionate contemplation, and the calm determinations of wisdom. On the contrary, we suffer every trivial error and irregularity to ripen into mischief
before we think of reformation; when we undertake it at last with minds heated to fermentation, and we perform it with rashness and violence. Let not, however, on this great occasion, any thing so intemperate and faulty mark your deliberations, nor leave a stain upon your measures. Reflect, that the fate of empires is now in suspence, and that the balance is in your hands. No
patriots of any age or country ever had a nobler opportunity of immortalizing their fame; nor, what is infinitely more to be desired, of obtaining the inward reward of self-approbation for having given happiness to millions. Remember your duty to mankind; remember your duty to God. Let not the breath of anger or resentment sully your councils; let not jealousy or ambition poison
your breasts, nor hang upon your tongues. Be calm, contemplative, candid, prudent, wife; let justice and benevolence rule your hearts; in one word, be Christians! embracing with love and charity your American brethren; and consulting their happiness equally with your own.
   The two grand questions now to be decided are; 1. Whether or not the British parliament or legislature, hath the right of sovereignty over North America? And, 2. Whether or not a British parliament hath a right to tax the North Americans?
   Although the latter question be properly involved in the former, since taxation is a part of legislation, yet being extremely simple and well understood, I shall consider it first, in order to get rid of it; so as it may not embarrass our discussion of the other, which it will be necessary for us to treat with all possible perspicuity. As for those who, with great warmth, maintain the right of parliament to tax the North Americans, surely they are rather to be pitied than argued with! Must they not be totally ignorant of the principles of that inestimable constitution, under which they have the happiness to live?
How then shall we expect them to be acquainted with the principles of the law of nature, from whence they flow? When I meet a man inclined towards this opinion, I do not contradict him; and I beseech him to avoid disputation above all things. I beg of him also to divest himself totally of every previous inclination for seeing the point in this or in that light; to consult immediately the great Mr. Locke, and other authors of note, and after a careful examination of the arguments for and against the Question, to decide upon it himself impartially and honestly. I remind him likewise, that it is his interest, as well as for the advantage of his country, that he should discover the truth: but a matter of total indifferency on which side it lies. If this fail to set him right, I do not dispute with him myself, nor do I assume the countenance or manner of an opponent; but I intimate to him, that, were he of my opinion, it would afford him great satisfaction of mind; since it gives me a consistency of
sentiment, by which I see every right of legislation perfectly consonant with the freedom and the happiness of mankind; and I then simply state my reasons for holding it. I have ever found this appeal to a man's own heart
and understanding, the most successful way of enlightening the one, and improving the other. Very few indeed of those with whom I have thus reasoned, on the present subject of American Taxation, have gone away unsatisfied, or found a necessity of reading, in order to be convinced: but ignorance and obstinacy, heated by former debate, have sometimes rendered my endeavours ineffectual; and such as were notorious for a vicious ambition,
or servility to the ruling powers, have generally remained immoveable, though without producing one suit or wise argument in support of their sentiments, or rather their assertions. Such men are not aware how much they lay open to the light that part of their characters they always mean to hide; and that there is as much dishonesty in that disposition which denies an evident truth, as in that which gives a false evidence, or takes a purse. It would have required no learning, but only common sense and common honesty, to have known that man hath no property in that which another can by right take from him without his consent, had not the world been pestered with writers of corrupt hearts, who, for wicked ends, have brought this clear proposition into dispute, and involved it in a casuistical jargon, which persons of plain sense, and too busy or too indolent for reflection, are apt to mistake for learning and superior skill; and to compliment it, first with doubting, and then denying upon trust, what they once understood and believed. But I trust, that characters so weak as these, so profligate as those, will have no influence with the British legislature; that its deliberations will be carried on with too much wisdom and
too much dignity to give a hearing to the drivelings of shallow and impudent pratters; or to suffer the unseemly violence of furious and tyrannical spirits, to discompose that serenity and divestment from passion, which ought ever to be observed in the presence of Majesty, and in the awful councils of the nation. Here I must express my concern, that it should seem to be thought by very
sensible men, that it is necessary to appeal to antient times, in order to ascertain the right of a free subject not to be taxed without his consent, either in person or by representation. With as much reason might we go about to
prove, that no ancient King had a right to take from every subject at his good pleasure, an eye or an ear. It is sufficient that we know any maxim in our law, to be at the same time a maxim of the law of nature, or demonstrably deducible from its fundamental principles. What is it to the purpose, whether such a maxim was received and acquiesced in only yesterday, or a thousand years ago? Truth is not the less truth, though mankind were in ignorance of it until lately. No mathematician, in demonstrating an astronomical problem, thinks it necessary to prove the properties of a triangle, a circle, or an ellipse; why then should the politician waste his time and embarrass his argument, with proving principles and axioms universally assented to by all just reasoners? not but that a maxim carries more weight and authority with it,
as this of the necessary connection between taxation and representation, when we find it has been the uniform sentiment of all ages; and references to antient times, and to various histories, serve very properly to illustrate political arguments; sometimes facilitating their reception among the timid and suspicious, who are apt to shrink at told and honest truths, to which they have not been familiarized. 
LETTER II
March 22, 17 74
   T0 every man of candour, I apprehend it must be evident, that Parliament hath not the rights of sovereignty over his Majesty's American subjects.Every species, indeed of declamation and sophistry, have been made use of in order to shew that it hath, because it gratifies the pride of Englishmen in general, to think that that legislature, in which they feel themselves to have a share, should govern half the world: but there are not wanting an honest few who think more justly and more generously. Amongst this number, a writer who subscribes himself A. B. in the Public Advertiser of the 22d, deserves the thanks of every friend to freedom. Except in his idea of the country of America, having been by the prerogative the property of the crown, which, in
she sense of the passage, signifies the King exclusively, I entirely agree with him in sentiment. He hath clearly and elegantly refuted the notion of parliamentary sovereignty; he has, with a generous warmth becoming an
Englishman, appealed to the manly sense and to the virtue of his countrymen. It would be an endless, as well as an useless work, to follow the many daily writers along all the mazes they wander through, in order to assert the sovereignty of parliament, and to justify administration in the harsh measures they are now carrying into execution. Notwithstanding their laboured and fine-spun performances, there is in reality no difficulty in the case. We have no need of profound learning, nor an intimate acquaintance with antiquity, nor even of the history of the respective provinces and their different origins; neither do we want copies of grants, charters, or acts of parliament, in order to judge of the question before us. If we comprehend but the most well-known
principles of the English constitution; if we comprehend but a few of the plain maxims of the law of nature, and the clearest doctrines of Christianity, all which are so simple and plain, as to be understood by hundreds, nay thousands, of plain men who know not that they are possessed of so useful a treasure, we have knowledge enough on this occasion. The only requisite wanting beyond this, is a heart strictly devoted to truth and virtue, without which we {hall never understand any doctrine that does not soothe our passions.
   The gospel of civil as well as religious salvation is hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed onto babes; that is, unto those who are not puffed up
with vanity and false learning, nor blinded by pride, ambition, and self-interest, but whose minds are in a state of humility and innocence. But we have our political Popes, who would fain have us distrust our common sense and our feelings, and believe implicitly in their infallibility; nor do I doubt, but they would prove as faithful guardians of civil, as the Roman Pope is of religious, liberty, was it once put into their hands. 
   It is a capital error in the reasonings of several writers on this subject, that they consider the liberty of mankind in the same light as an estate or chattel, and go about to prove or disprove their right to it by the letter of grants and charters, by custom and usage, and by municipal statutes. Hence too we are told, that these men have a
right to more, those to less, and some to none at all. Such a title to the liberty of mankind is not established on such rotten foundations: 'tis not among mouldy parchments, nor in the cobwebs of a casuist's brain we are to look for
it; it is the immediate, the universal gift of God, and the seal of it is that free-will which he hath made the noblest constituent of man's nature. It is not derived from any one, but original in every one; it is inherent and unalienable. The most antient inheritance cannot strengthen this right; the want of inheritance cannot impair it. The child of a slave is as free-born, according
to the law of nature, as he who could trace a free ancestry up to the creation. Slavery in all its forms, in all its degrees, is an outrageous violation of the rights of mankind; an odious degradation of human nature. It is utterly impossible that any human being can be without a title to liberty, except he himself hath forfeited it by crimes which make him dangerous to society.
   Let us then hear no more of a right in our present constituted parliament to govern the Americans, as being derived from any former exercise of this sovereignty from the original dependence and protection of the emigrants and infant colonies, or from the tenour of grants and charters! The respective governments in America, are no longer dependent colonies; they are independent nations. - Not that I allow they ever were otherways than free (although dependent) in the most absolute sense: All their original constitutions either were, or ought to have been on the true principle of freedom. They are not to be deprived of it as a man would lose an estate, by a flaw in their title; for I have already proved, that their title can have no flaw. Those who are so fond of placing them metaphorically in the relation of children to a parent state, and thence are childish enough to argue for a blind filial obedience, should re-collect, that the power of a parent, even during childhood, doth not extend to any act of tyranny or injustice; and totally ceases when the child arrives at years of maturity. Then, as to the property of a child, a parent cannot take it from him even with his consent; and as soon as his independency puts it in his power to give it to his parent, he hath also the power of with-holding it if he think proper. In short, during infancy, he must
be protected agreeable to the laws of equity; when arrived at manhood, he is free, and becomes his own protector. But analogy not being the safe road of reason, we resign it again, after this short excursion, to those who carelessly range the field? of politics for amusement; but are not solicitous, as we are, of reaching the abodes of truth and freedom.
   The Americans, in common with the whole race of man, have indisputably an inherent right to liberty; and to be governed by such laws as shall best provide for the continuance of that liberty, and for securing their property. These are the hinges on which turn the welfare and happiness of society ; these are the true, the only ends of civil government. But how are they to be obtained under the sovereignty of a British Parliament? Are not the legislators of every free state to be bound themselves by the laws they make? And, must they not tax their own purses, together with those of their constituents? Is there any safety for the people without these ties upon their legislators? Will a member of the British parliament be bound by any law enacted for, and confined to America? Must the purses of the Americans be at his mercy, while his own shall be exempt from every taxation he may vote? What English school-boy, so ignorant of the constitution, as to admit these absurdities?
He must first go out into the world, and, by the help of a little political sophistry, unlearn his common-sense, and even his ABC.
   The secure enjoyment of liberty and property, in which consist the welfare and happiness of a people, being the true ends of all civil government; this is the foundation alone on which we must argue concerning who have a right to govern. The answer is obvious and short. The rights of sovereignty reside in the people themselves; that is, they have a right to chuse their own governors.
Minds that do not feel the force of self-evidences may deny the truth of this simple proposition: but they maybe assured, that if they set themselves about controverting it, they will only bewilder themselves in their own subtleties, without telling us any thing that will benefit mankind. Don't we all acknowledge, that the Americans are a free people? But how are they free, if they cannot choose their own governors; if their laws be not enacted by their own representatives? In what doth our freedom consist if not in these very rights as the essence of it? In these rights which we have so often asserted, for which we have so often bled! That people cannot be free who are not governed by their own consent. Those who are governed by their own consent, choose their own governors. This is indispensably requisite towards the welfare and
happiness of every people; it is an unalterable law of nature; that is, it is the law of God.

LETTER III
March 24, 1774
AT the same time that I hold that "Parliament hath not the Rights of Sovereignty over his Majesty's American Subjects, and that these rights reside
in themselves," I do not mean to promote an ungrateful forsaking of the mother country by her children, to sever and estrange the sons from the fathers; but where filial duty and obedience ceases to substitute in its stead a brotherly affection, a manly and independent friendship, - which naturally takes place where the parent hath truly loved and exercised his authority for the sole end of promoting the welfare of the child, without a view to self-
interest, or the gratification of pride, ambition, or other vicious passion. I would consider the American governments, like that of Ireland, as sister kingdoms; and I would cement a lasting union with them as between the
separate branches of one great family. We know that it is impossible to effect such a family union, if the arrogance of the elder branch expect to govern the others, or even demand their homage; and how much more so, if it demand the use of their purses at its own discretion, as a return for former assistance, or under pretence of maintaining the honour and interest of the whole combined family. But while every one is left independent, and no other influence is made use of but that of sincere brotherly affection, a reciprocation of good offices, and a fair representation of the general advantage of the
whole, there is little doubt but that all will be ready to contribute their respective shares, 2nd that due respect and deference will ever be paid to the elder house. Family pride, no less than those advantages which result from unions of such a nature, will produce this effect,  except we be ashamed of our family. I hope a selfish and tyrannical spirit in the English, will not make the Americans ashamed of their descent: but illustration is misleading us again into the tempting, but unsure, path of analogy. Let us quit it once more before we lose fight of the direct road.
   Every one of those writers, who endeavour to support the pretensions of parliament to the sovereignty of America by any shew of abstract reasoning, have, so far as they have fallen under my observation, either fat out upon
defective premises, or from good ones, have drawn false conclusions; as needs must be in this cafe, until truth become a changeling. Plain sense, and an ingenuous mind, are sufficient to guard any one against their sophistry: but we have need of a little more penetration, and to be somewhat conversant in affairs, when we would dispute with a different sort, who plunge headlong into the depths of politics, and hurry us unprepared into all the intricacies of commerce; placing at once before our eyes, in an indirect point of view, that multiplicity of wheels within wheels, pulleys upon pulleys, and springs upon
springs, which belong to the complicated machines of government and trade, instead of directing our attention to the first principles of motion, and the few master springs, on whose movements all the rest depend in a regular order and subordination. By these means they endeavour to confound, when they cannot convince us. But these are dishonest arts, the common tricks of designing men in every sphere. They are too stale and hackneyed, however, to impose upon men of sound and cultivated understandings. These know, that government and trade, as well as every science whatever, are established on a very small number of fundamental principles of the utmost simplicity, since they must be self-evident, or they are no principles at all; and they know also, that those who mean honestly, do always ultimately refer every maxim, by clear inferences, to some one or other of these simple, self-evident principles. All the subtleties and refinements, all the arguments that the wit of man can
invent, will never be sufficient to justify any species of arbitrary dominion, while we retain a knowledge of this short and simple propositions "the good of society is the end of civil government;" nor will they ever justify a discretionary taxation by a prince or government, the people being unrepresented, so long as we know, that "a man hath no property in that which another can by right take from him without his consent." 
   One of the most specious arguments made use of in support of a sovereign power in parliament over the Americans, is that drawn from a supposed necessity of equipping a powerful armament at a short notice, for the protection of the whole empire, as these gentlemen will have it: hereupon we are asked, if his Majesty is to have imposed upon him the arduous task of first obtaining a majority in two Houses of Commons in Europe, and about thirty
provincial assemblies in America, before he can raise the necessary supplies? and the interrogators seem to plume themselves much upon the impossibility of carrying-on the executive part of government under such restraints. Let
me, in return, ask how we draw supplies from Ireland? Are they voted in the British House of Commons? Then, in the first place, I answer, that if an empire be too large, and its parts too widely separated by immense oceans, of
other impediments, to admit of being governed on the principles essentially belonging to all free governments, it is an over-grown empire, and ought to be divided before it fall to pieces. The welfare and happiness of mankind supercede every other possible claim or pretension to governs. When we find ourselves subject to a distant power, which cannot possibly govern us on any other principles than those of tyranny, we have an inherent right, by the law of nature, and it is an indispensable duty to ourselves, and to our posterity, to shake off such an unjust yoke, and to erect a free government amongst
ourselves. Those degenerate Englishmen, who are now seeking to enslave the Americans, would ill brook the government of the Emperor of Germany, if by any means he should lawfully inherit the crown of these kingdoms, and make Vienna the seat of government. Would they suffer themselves to be taxed by German ministers, or German diets? Would they not say to their sovereign,
"either come and reside amongst us, or delegate to your vice-roy all the prerogatives of the crown, and leave us, in conjunction with him alone to tax and to govern ourselves according to our own just laws, and the rights of a free people?"  Can any language be plainer? Can any doctrine be more intelligible or more equitable? But, in answer to the above interrogatory, I have another answer as intelligible as this.
   Establish the mode of governing which these persons contend for, and there will still be the same inevitable delay, with regard to the American supplies, as they would have us believe is peculiar to the mode which the people there claim a right to exercise. For tho' a British parliament might vote them with their usual alacrity, yet we must send to America to collect them. And if our
armament cannot go on without first sending so far for this collection, its operations may as well be suspended a few days or a few weeks longer, in order to obtain it on British, rather than on Prussian principles. But the truth is, we should not defer the equipment of any necessary armament one moment on this account. Do we at present wait for the assembling of parliament, and a vote of supplies, before we arm in any just cause in which the safety, the interest or honour of the state is concerns!? Doth not the executive branch of government, by virtue of its own powers, and in discharge of its duty, put the state in a posture of defence upon every alarm without loss of time, and then apply to parliament for its approbration and support? Is it ever with-held in a just cause? Hath the government no resources, no ways
and means of its own, for discharging, or contracting for the future discharge of, these prompt expences of the state? If the uncertainty of meeting with like support from America, as they find in Great Britain, should be a clog upon our. ministers in their warlike projects, might it not be fortunate for the people of both countries? Would it not make them extremely cautious and prudent how they involved us in continental politics and in German wars? No ingenuous man will, however, entertain a serious doubt of the readiness of the Americans to contribute their share to every necessary expence of government, so long as they shall find themselves in possession of their freedom. They must contribute their share; that is to say, they must preserve their own existence as a people, and defend their own property, under any form of government whatever. When men tell us, that an enlightened and free
people are refractory; that they will not contribute their proportion of taxes; that at the hazard of their lives by the sword or the halter, they oppose and seek to subvert the government, and this for a succession of years; they tell us, with a moral certainty, though perhaps without meaning it, that they feel some real Oppressions, some real invasions made on their rights or liberties; for no
other causes ever did, or ever will, produce a general and permanent opposition in the whole body of a people towards their governors. When we remark likewise, that, in the present contest, there is no religious zeal of persecution; no national antipathy or rancour, but quite the reverse; no introduction of a new code of laws by a foreign conqueror; no imaginary pretender to weaken the allegiance of the people towards their sovereign; nor indeed any one cause of dissatisfaction, but the avowed one; and that, on the part of the peoples clearly justified on the obvious principles of the English constitution, can we hesitate a moment to pronounce what ought to be done? We ought to allow the Americans to tax themselves as an inseparable adjunct to freedom.


