POSTSCRIPT
April, 1775
ALTHOUGH the foregoing parts of this work were all written with an earnest desire to serve the public, yet they have not been published with an expectation of their being either well received or much attended to, by those to whom they were immediately addressed :  --  until matters between Great-Britain and her colonies should, through the rashness of our counsels, be brought to extremities; and that, no longer having choice in our power, we should be reduced to act from necessity alone. Perhaps there hath seldom been a cause less popular in this country, nor one that ought to have been more so, than that which the writer hath endeavoured to plead. That our colonies have a right to be independent, is a conclusion which I am well persuaded must inevitably result from the question; whenever discussed with temper and patience, and with a liberal, candid and honest turn of mind. Or the truth of this observation I can aver, in the most solemn manner, that I have had personal experience; and that too, in instances where the persons entered into the enquiry under the common prejudices of Britons in favour of the British sovereignty over them. It was once my own prejudice. Like the rest of my countrymen not immediately concerned in the government, I had never reflected deeply on the subject; nor indeed had the new matter with which it abounded, been ever treated of and committed to books. But the cries of America pierced my ears, and her complaints funk into my heart. I was moved, and I determined to try the cause of this appellant in my own breast. I found it good one, and that she was really much aggrieved. The respondent
denied not the facts; but attempted to justify them. To this end he produced a large collection, of charters, statutes and precedents, as the authorities upon which he had acted.
Pardon me. Sir, replied I, all that is only paper and parchment  --  except there were two contracting parties, which there were not; and except they be all signed and sealed interchangeably, upon equitable conditions, mutually and reciprocally advantageous and obligatory, and binding upon both parties; which all the world knows they are not. There is a certain constitutional maxim, which says, that a quid pro quo is indispensibly requisite for giving validity and obiigatory virtue to any and to every contract between two parties, otherwise it is nullus pactut, a void covenant. All these deeds are, to be sure, legible enough; and sure enough also, have for their contents what you are pleased to recite;  --  the writing is very fair, and they bear plenty of seals and signatures, royal and official:  --  " Be it enacted," and other binding forms, stand in their accustomed places; and they wear withal, to fay truth, a consequential and respectable appearance. But this appearance alone will
nor be sufficient for your purpose. If, as the appellant urged, and as indeed you boast, they were all of your own fabricating and imposing, this alone, were they even unexceptionable in their conditions, renders them absolutely nugatory. But if, besides this, many of them are totally subversive of justice and equity, utterly repugnant to the law of nature, and shocking to humanity as upon the very face of them appears, how, Sir, can you forget what is due to your own character, and so far depart from all that is right and respectable, as to plead, any longer, acts which are not only null and void for want of the
essential principles of validity, but specifically criminal; and which it would be equally criminal not to oppose and resist! Besides, Sir, I fear that, should you remove this cause once more, and put it at issue upon the last appeal that even then, with all your supposed advantages, it might not terminate to your advantage. *The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong;"
but sometimes "the mighty are put down, and the proud are scattered in the imagination of their hearts."  --  -- ? My deeds, "says he, "upon my head! I stand here for law; I stand here on my bond "  --  Be not obstinate, Sir, in a wrong cause; peruse, I beseech you, these nugatory deeds (nugatory so far as relates to the point now in dispute) without a prejudice to your own side of the
question, and examine with equal attention and candour all that hath been urged against them, by your own friends as well as your enemies: you will then think differently depend upon it; you will chearfully cast them all aside, and, resuming your wonted frankness and good-nature, will treat with the appellant as your equal: for all are equals in acts of contract and convention, and in the scales of justice. Be wise, Sir, and be happy. Your future intercourse will, I promise you, be mutually honourable, pleasing and beneficial, provided it be regulated by justice, temper and right reason. 
   Although, as I have said above, that I did not expect the foregoing sheets would for a season be either well received or much attended to, by those to whom they were more immediately addressed; as indeed I had little better
expectations from the public in general, until the failures of all other expedients than that which is there proposed, should open their eyes a little more; yet I trust, that a discerning and upright few have read them with approbation; and, if I do not deceive myself, I think there is to be discovered a daily alteration, of public sentiment, which tends, though slowly, yet with certainty, to terminate in the conclusion I have long since drawn; from the premises which our American contest hath furnished us with, those who have given a careful attention to the whole of the literary altercation in pamphlets and other publications, and viewed the question also as agitated by the able
speakers in the houses of parliament, and have moreover deeply meditated upon it in their own minds, pursuing every material argument to its legitimate result, must I am persuaded have discovered that it ultimately turns upon
this one point of dependency or independency.  While, this capital point remains undetermined, it appears to me quite a frivolous waste of time to debate upon any other part of the question, which is infinitely complex, while each part refers to this point: it is therefore this, as a leading principle on which all the rest depends, that ought primarily to be considered and decided upon, before any other can be discussed with propriery or advantage. I
know not whether the American advocates have paid due attention to the fundamental principles which have given such authority and success to their several pleadings in favour of their injured clients: but all of them, they may
depend upon it, when faithfully traced up to their source, and allowed their full operation, will as necessarily and incontestably prove rights of independency to belong to the British Americans, as they do support the constitutional rights of Englishmen. He who means to shew that those people are not intitled to independence, and yet would argue in support of their freedom, will soon contradict or confound himself; for in order thereto, he must derive that freedom from other principles than those of the British constitution; which however no one has yet been silly enough to attempt.    Now I do assert and will maintain, that, by the pure and genuine principles and the indispensible maxims of that constitution, they are as much entitled to legislative independence as Englishmen are entitled to representation in parliament, to trial by jury, or any other the most indisputable constitutional benefit whatsoever, because their self-preservation requires it. Would but their many able and patriotic friends amongst us advert to this truth, possess themselves of it clearly and fully, and speak it out boldly, they would find it give a strength and consistency to their arguments, which at present they
evidently want and must want without it, as it is the very soul of the cause, and which would not fail to impress an irresistible conviction on the generality of their hearers and readers. For my own part, I solemnly protest, that the main arguments in favour of the colonies, if not resting on the foundation of theirs right to independence as a principle taken for granted, appear to my judgment
very inconclusive and unsatisfactory. They prove indeed to demonstration the impolitic and absurd conduct of administration; and they expose in strong colours their inhumanity, which the principles of tyranny itself will not
justify: but still they leave the foundation of their arbitrary power unmoved  -- untouched:  --  and so long as nature itself doth not revolt at the excesses of their cruelty, they may, on these gentlemens own principles, continue tyrants, and plead the sanctions of law and justice against the constitutional rights of the colonists.  --  So long as they admit that the British Empire, as we proudly phrase it, comprehends within it the states of America; so long do they afford the minister all the means he wants for the arbitrary government of those states; arbitrary I say, because it cannot be otherwise in our hands, if those states be truly and rightfully parts of this empire, they undoubtedly must submit to British government; but British government, agreeable to the constitution, it is impossible, as hath been shewn, to administer them from hence. What is the obvious result? 
   I am well aware, that by some I shall be thought needlessly to speculate and refine, and be warned against calling in doubt the authority of government with too nice a scrutiny. But to such I answer, that no man would be more backward than myself to risk the peace of society, by bringing unnecessarily into discussion latent and nice distinctions in favour of public liberty, which the governing powers were wise and honest enough to leave dormant and at rest as they found them. But when mistaken, designing or violent ministers avail themselves of the passive inattention of the people to these distinctions in their favour, and thereupon ground a hope of successfully innovating upon the wholesome guards and defence of the constitution; when they make novel demands, introduce new and unsound precedents, cause them hastily and in-
decently to be passed into laws, and then, under the pretence, and alas! under the sanction of law, proceed to numberless and unheard-of oppressions, which the feelings of a Hottentot would inform him were contrary to reason and to justice; and when they (hut their ears against complaints of these wrongs, treat humble petitions with contempt, dutiful remonstrances as acts of disobedience to lawful authority, and constitutional opposition as rebellion;
reiterating all the while their tyrannical mandates with more and more severity every time they are not slavishly obeyed; when, I say, they do all this, and throughout the whole rest their justification on the letter of the law, let me ask if it be not high time to speculate, to refine, and have recourse even to metaphysical distinctions, provided they be fairly deducible from truth:  --  in short, to scrutinize their pretensions to the marrow, to fathom them to the
very bottom ; in order to detect those covered rocks and sand-banks which are the true causes of all that disturbance we behold on the surface of our present political navigation; and to warn the people against suffering the anchor to be cast in such foul ground at the peril of shipwreck; or trusting any longer the guidance of the vessel to helmsmen who have brought themselves into such a dilemma, that they know not which way to steer for safety; and yet, through pride, shame and vexation, still perversely refuse to have recourse to the compass of the constitution, which alone can set them right and bring them into port. We must either do this, or resign our American kindred to absolute slavery as by law established. And on this occasion I must take leave to say, that to the advice of those who recommend the suppressing of truth, we should ever listen with much caution or much jealousy, according to their respective characters. Some there are whom a pardonable timidity, and some
whom an amiable humanity and benevolence of mind, incline, and often no doubt with reason, to this circumspect and preventive conduct: but, for the far greater part, it is the artful and insidious suggestion of crafty and ambitious men, who have gotten the power of the state into their own hands; friends to all that mystery, ignorance and superstition on which the keeping of their abused authority depends, and by which their odious vices are to be gratified at the expence of the credulous people. Whereas it is in the divine constitution of things that fallacy in itself, though not perhaps immediately hurtful, hath ever a necessary tendency to introduce evil into the moral and political systems of the world; while truth, on the contrary, tends as naturally and necessarily to the final, though not perhaps to the present, introduction of good. Where indeed there is no attempt to establish fallacies for wicked
purposes, it may often be more for the peace and welfare of society that we do not too curiously search after every hidden truth; but when that diabolical attempt is once made, we cannot easily go too deep in our enquiries after
it, nor can we place it in too strong a light. Happy will it be for future generations, if their princes and ministers should profit themselves of the wise reflections on this delicate subject which they may find in the excellent Considerations on the measures carrying on with respect to the British colonies in North America., p. 22 -- 27.
   Were we not carefully to distinguish between general maxims and their exceptions, the writer might, under the authority of the foregoing one, have been totally silent on the subject of these essays: but we trust that the reasons
assigned for the part acted on this occasion, will not only acquit us of the base and wicked designs of an incendiary, an unnatural child of Great-Britain, or a traiterous fomentor of rebellion; (charges very liberally bestowed by a certain class of persons on even those champions of American freedom, who have not however as yet given utterance to that horrible word  --  independence) but that we shall in time be allowed to have spoken with the warning voice of a faithful, though unwelcome monitor; of a sincere, affectionate and determined friend, though no flatterer. Conscious of no other motives than what are becoming of
this character, we shall proceed to deliver somewhat more fully what at first we rather hinted than explained. Though now indeed it is not our intention to fay more than is absolutely necessary to prevent cavils, and in order to furnish
materials for thinking upon, to those who are disposed to think: for, from those to whom even thinking is too great a trouble, we must not expect the still greater effort of acting in the public cause; wherefore it is needless to spend
our time in voluminous writing for their information. And after all, those, alas! who are most capable of judging, and whose duty it is to judge of, and to conduct, the public affairs, are the last it should seem from whom attention
is to be expected.
   But notwithstanding the people, for want of those informations obtained by ministers and statesmen, are less able to judge accurately, yet it is their just praise that they are disposed to judge as well as they can, and have a real
desire that things should be conducted for the best, the good of the whole being alone consulted. It is therefore that the judgment of the people, with all its defects, is to be respected; that every assistance is to be afforded it by
those who mean well; and that its slow progress in arriving at ripeness and maturity is to be allowed and waited for with patience. Like the nut, when most ripe it is the most solid. The people, though slow indeed to receive 
instruction, will however in the end listen to reason and learn wisdom. With them, the best arguments and most upright plans will ever be finally approved; and through them alone it is that the friends of public liberty must hope to influence the decisions of the cabinet and the most essential measures of administrations where eve two or three virtuous men, though ever so responsible to the public from the nature of their offices, cannot, it is presumable, guide and direct as they would wish ; but find themselves
under the necessity of either abandoning the helm wholly to bad men, or else of carrying into execution measures which they often in their hearts condemn and sometimes abhor. Sad alternative! And unhappy that state where
wisdom and virtue are thus of necessity obliged to vail to vice and insufficiency! But such the alternative must ever be in this country, until the people shall exert themselves to purify the fountain of government: or until the individual who hath alone the power of doing it himself, shall greatly undertake the noble, the god-like talk; and for that purpose select about him and resolutely support a few counsellors of an unfashionable virtue and sterling patriotism, wise and intrepid enough to work so thorough and so necessary a reformation, in contempt and despite of the servile and adulatory, the interested and artful, the ambitious and treacherous counsels of those sycophants and devouring locusts that are the general curie of courts and of
their country! Whatever may have been suggested to him by those in his bosom confidence, he will find this the surest road to happiness and glory; and the only road to an extraordinary degree of power, which would then be as unbounded as Britain and British America in close union, actuated by one foul, and moving in one direction, could confer. That such a glory, eclipsing all the glories of antiquity would transcend whatever hath irradiated any
earthly diadem, that such a power would in the comparison reduce to mere littleness the boasted power of imperial Rome, and cause that proud mistress of the then feeble and barbarous world to hide her diminished head, is a proposition as undeniable, in my humble opinion, as that health, vigour and length of days are the natural effects of temperance; honour and happiness the usual offspring of virtue.
   When I first undertook to publish my sentiments on the critical situation of this country with her colonies, I was far from despairing that others "would come after me  mightier than I;" and it is with infinite satisfaction I have observed to arise, one after another, several excellent and most respectable writers on the subject, "the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to loose." I, indeed, with a feeble voice, warned a heedless generation to flee from the evil to come, or more properly to prevent its coming; but there are those who have succeeded me, of whom to an infatuated people I might with much verity say (I hope without prophaneness, for though I adopt the emphatical language of holy writ, I mean no comparison between the persons spoken of), " there stand some among you whom ye know not;" preachers of peace and prophets:  -- - hear them: Would to heaven that mistaken ministers and a misguided prince would, after the example of the conscious publicans, say unto them, "Masters, what shall we do?" And that "the soldiers likewise would demand of them, and what shall we do?" Because the former must receive for answer, "Exact no more than that which is appointed you;" and the latter would be taught to
"Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely." While these greater teachers continue to enforce their admonitions with superior eloquence and argument, and with many an instructive reference to.the page of history, it
being mine to pursue a different path in the same pilgrimage. I mean still to keep within the sphere I first allotted myself. I shall continue to avoid as much as possible all recitals of statutes and authorities, all references to facts and precedents, all appeals to records and histories, as things too often uncertain, vague, indeterminate and contradictory one of another; leading to disputation rather than to truth and happiness, except comprehensively understood, examined and compared with unbiassed candour, and treated of in the most masterly manner. My references are to a law and a constitution which at all times past, present and to come, have spoken, do speak, and ever will speak the same language without any alteration or ambiguity. My appeals are to the common sense, the hearts and consciences of my countrymen. lf they mean
honestly to themselves and to one another, it will not be necessary for their friends to be at the trouble of writing in a large and voluminous way for their instruction. But such indeed is the real way of the world, that the writings of honest men of every species will be of use, and those of the kind I do not pretend to, if well executed, the most so. However, on the subject now under consideration, they seem to have been carried nearly to their full length; all in a manner that can be said in that way, hath been said; and for the present the subject seems to be exhausted. On the contrary, the line which I have ventured on, I fear with too much presumption, appears to have been neglected: and surely there is field enough for the display of knowledge, the proof of genius, and the exercise of judgment. I have but as it were passed through it, gathering only a slender specimen of its productions, a few of its spontaneous fruits and flowers which offer themselves to the hand of every traveller: but to him who hath strength and talents for the culture, there is an assurance of a golden harvest.  --  But until this wished for husbandman shall arrive, and while we have yet a moment's breathing time ere the bill of famine shall have driven the insulted colonists to desperation, and the fatal consequences shall
come upon us like a whirlwind; and with ardent, anxious hopes for the best, I return once more and for the last time to my post.
   It is not in order to dispute, for to that there is no end; it is not to recapitulate the endless errors of administrations since 1763, for that too would be a tedious task: neither is it to represent what might have been the happy effects had we invariably proceeded in our ancient course of policy
towards the colonies, before the scheme of taxation made the first breach between us; not yet is it to play the state-tinker by pretending to beat out the bruises of a battered vessel, to solder up its cracks, and once more to unite by
cramps and rivets its separating parts, when these very superadditions would only, like the new cloth in the old garment, rend to pieces its worn-out substance, and hasten the more rapidly its final destruction. No; it is not any
one of these impracticable and useless labours I am about to undertake; but, since this same crazy vessel is of the purest metal, yet not well adapted to our future use by reason of its very unwieldy magnitude, and having out-ljved the fashion of the times in which it was wrought, I mean that we should act the part of the judicious goldsmith and cast it anew by Instead of one out-sized vessel, consisting of  two parts ill joined to each other, like the bulky extremities of a wasp held together by a too-feeble waist, and ever liable to be wounded and even to break asunder at the point of contact, I would have us mould it into two separate and distinct parts or members, which yet, like
the ball and socket, should intimately correspond and harmonize throughout their whole extent, wholly filling and embracing each other respectively. Thus would they be inseparably united; yet their union such as to leave each free to move and act, independent of the other, in every respect but that of a capacity to fall away from and desert its companion; and thus would they be perfectly fitted for co-operation one with the other. By these means too the strength, solidity and durableness of both would be improved and increased, in proportion to the reduction of surface and contraction of dimensions in each. Hereby also we should perfectly remedy all those defects in their original construction, which neither were nor could be foreseen by those persons, who through a great variety of different and jarring designs and motives, and at many different periods of time without any kind of concert or conjoint plan, put their several successive hands to this imperfect work: and all apprehensions of future breaches, divisions or total separation, would be for ever removed; at least to a period too far distant in the infinity of time to be foreseen.
   While almost the whole legislature, for aught that I know to the contrary, are unanimous in maintaining the grand principle on which administration acts, namely, that the colonies are subject to the supreme legislative power of Great-Britain, and acts consistently enough so long as it has that foundation to go upon; and while a great majority of the people are of the same way of thinking, and still believe themselves intitled, though they know not how, to the very flattering distinction and glory of having a share in this same supreme legislative power; that is to say, while the ministers have the popular voice in support of the fundamentals of their American form of government; surely they must be thought to have managed ill in pursuing measures that meet with general dislike and condemnation, as arbitrary in an extreme, and directly
subversive of the constitution. Whence this inconsistency and contradiction in public sentiment? Must we not learn to account for it by considering the difference of ailing upon false principle, and of merely entertaining them as
speculative notions in our own minds? Is not the unreflecting and man-affecting youth continually professing a wish that he could debauch the sister or the daughter of his friend or acquaintance, and is there not sophistry enough in the flattering language of his passions to persuade him 'tis a meritorious, or at least a harmless act: although we often know that he is the farthest from being rascal enough coolly to premeditate and unfeelingly to perform all the wiles and villainy necessary to carry his idle professions into
action; and that the first act of baseness in his progress, touching with self-contempt his feeling heart, would open his eyes, and cause him to look with horror and detestation upon what he so lately considered as fair and reputable. So it is not to be wondered at that the speculative notions the youthful opinions of an uninstructed and unreflecting people, flattered and misled by national pride and vanity, and moreover duped into a belief that the fruition of American delights is not to be had without British sovereignty, should on this occasion be favourable to the support of that very ministerial violence and injustice which however shocks them in the exercise. But did a true sense of the political guilt of administration strike home upon their
hearts, we may be very certain they would no longer contribute to it by a heedless declaration of such sentiments; but with one voice confess their error and express their unanimous disapprobation of measures so contrary to the constitution.  --  While so considerable a party thus do mischief by suffering their reason and their virtuous principles to sleep, there is much more harm done by those, who for the sake of popularity and their own purposes, profess in a great measure that which is right, while we know they have no principles at all, and are the mere slaves of interest and a traitorous ambition. These are the professed libertines and confirmed debauchees in politic; who, while they laugh at the plain orthodox doctrines in government, hold yet a certain latitudinarian, pliable, free-thinking kind of a faith, which may very conveniently be interpreted either this way or that, as shall be necessary to condemn a rival or to justify themselves for the self-same actions. These men, when ministers, will commit adultery with a state in wedlock, violate the virginity of a colony, or hold an incestuous commerce with the mother-country without one feeling of compunction; and can produce you their philosophical
creed with many a nice distinction, many a subtle stroke of casuistry, which, though it is impossible to understand, they will most religiously assure you not only affords them a justification, but enjoins on them what they have done as a positive and indispensable duty. But then, let the wheel of court-fortune give but a single turn, and topple them out of the seat of power, this same creed shall instantly be produced to prove the clean contrary. Nay, their piety is now shocked to such a degree at deeds so foul and enormities so gross, and their zeal for the true faith runs so high, they lift up their voices and cry aloud that the present perpetrators of their own crimes are not men but monsters, not found political divines but state dæmons, and that nothing less than their blood can make atonement for their crimes. Of this stamp I fear are too
many of those who are now ready to tear the minister in pieces for coercing the colonies into obedience to that very authority which they themselves contributed to establish, and I even now (in order to preserve the means of acting the tyrant themselves when it shall again come to their turn) maintain they are subject to. After concurring to lodge in any man's hands an unjust and arbitrary power, 'tis ridiculous to talk of his abusing it. We might with as much
reason cut a breach in our bank, and complain of the river for overflowing our lands. It is not, in my opinion, by carping and cavilling at this proposal and that plan of the minister, or running counter to all his measures, that his opponents are to shew their patriotism at this crisis  but first, by making a conquest within their own breasts over all the pride, ambition and inordinate love of rule which they shall find there; and then by contending like men for the grand constitutional principles and fruit, not the empty forms and husks of government. Before I can compliment these gentlemen with my suffrage for the minister's power being transferred to their better keeping, they must convince me that they differ with him in essentials. I must perceive that they allow and maintain that the colonist's title to liberty is as good and as extensive as their own; and that they strive with all their strength to procure
them such a liberty. When they do this, they will have the suffrages of most reflecting, dispassionate and upright men to favour their then honest ambition. But here, alas! is the stumbling-block. They can reproach the minister with a design against the liberties of America; they can talk, and talk, and say abundance of fine things in favour of freedom: but, once mention to them the word independence, they shrug their shoulders and cry, "that is carrying things too far;  --  American freedom is very consistent with a parliamentary legislative supremacy" (this indeed is coming to the point, would they but give us their proof of this proposition; but that I believe they will find cannot be given.
 
