LETTER VIII
April 8, 1774
Now, strange and unaccountable as this may appear to the Dean, it has been by means of the very same kind precisely that our eyes have been successively opened to see the just sights of the people, the due limits, of authority in their rulers, in every particular in which they are now legally ascertained. A rude and infant nation of husbandmen, having no pressing occasion, is not very logical of critically learned in the law, and all its remote consequences, it must move progressively towards the acquisition of knowledge as well as strength. This knowledge will always be first consisted to reflecting individuals, before it will spread at large amongst the people; and} jnany such individuals amongst the Americans, by the Dean's own account, (p. 145, 146) have had "their eyes
open" these hundred years and upwards. The bulk of a nation must be made to feel, before they reason with tolerable accuracy, or lay much stress upon their governors keeping strictly within the pale of just and legal authority. Even self-evident truths are not discerned, until the attention of mankind is called upon by necessity, or some other powerful cause, to examine the subject in which they exist. The divine right of Kings, and their absolute power too, might have remained in the creeds of all nations to this day, had not a too liberal exercise
of these powers taught them to reason by making them feel. No man in any country, ever thought of scrupulously defining the proper powers of taxation, while he possessed nothing worth taxing; nor of limiting the exercise of such powers, so long as the contributions required were trifling to him, the occasions of raising them apparent to all men, and the application of them known to, and approved by, every individual It is, when a state begins to rise into some degree of political consequence, "and the operations of its government are become too secret and complex to be penetrated by the vulgar eye, and at the same time grow expensive to the people, that they, not knowing what is going forward, and suspicious of some ill towards themselves, begin to investigate the legal powers of taxing, and how far they ought to be exercised, nor shall we exceed the truth, if we add, that all their jealousy and vigilance have been little enough, in the happiest age and nation, for guarding against the king-craft and tyranny of their rulers. While too insignificant to become the objects, or the tools of ambition, they remain in ignorance; it is the alarm of chains, and the dislike of burthens, that "enlighten them and open their eyes." After what has been said, I should hope it was quite unnecessary to refute the feeble arguments we find in p. 101, 102, 103, drawn from the freedom which an American now is permitted to enjoy, of voting for a
member of the British parliament. We must remember, however, that he cannot do this without being a British freeholder, or holding some property which makes him at least a British subject; and it is therefore as a Briton, not as an American, he is represented. But to trace this rope of sand any farther, would really be to mock my readers; and I have already sufficiently replied to all such sorry subtleties. If the true and proper relation, in which this country stands with regard to the colonies, hath not, in all particulars, been accurately defined by mutual agreement and declaratory laws; but there are to be found
some little inconsistencies, as there needs must be in such a connection so long as Great Britain, through a love of rule, finds means to evade a fair discussion of the question of right; which, I pray, is the course that a wise and
good man ought to pursue, in order to reconcile all contradictions, and to obtain a just idea of what is fit to be done for the remedying these inconveniences? Ought not the welfare of the whole people, without any partiality for countries, to out-weigh, in his mind, every other consideration? Must it not be his polar star, whenever he ventures upon the dark and deceitful sea of casuistry? Will he, for a moment, believe in the truth of any position or maxim, how antient, how specious soever, that is evidently incompatible with this object? Surely he will not lose sight of the true, the only ends of government, and labour to harden the heart and strengthen the hands of tyranny! Nor will he, surely, disregard the plain and obvious dictates of reason and nature, and, in defence of a bad cause, stoop and strain to catch at every little flaw and defect in forms and precedents! But one false step in reasoning, frequently misleads a good man into opinions and disputations prejudicial to truth. However, when the good of the public shall ultimately appear to be the end he aims at, we must make charitable allowances for his mistakes. Such allowances I am disposed to make to the author of the tract; but yet as a well-wisher, and in perfect good humour, I must needs say he has indulged too freely a spirit, I will not say a talent, of ridicule; he is too supercilious even to his nephew, and is apt to sneer somewhat out of season, and when a satirical opponent might very easily retort it upon him with double force. Neither doth he appear to me quite so cool, dispassionate and impartial, as becomes a man who takes upon him to elucidate a disputed question mix which depends the welfare, perhaps the existence of nations. fie must have been a poor casuist, indeed, not to have obtained a victory over an antagonist of his own making: but we need not quarrel with him for beating him since he {hewed him so much mercy and good manners. But doth knot rather favour of disingenuousness, to put the maimed and mutilated arguments of the Americans into the mouth of a wrongheaded ignorant boy? Had it not been more to the advantage of his knowledge and eloquence, to have impressed conviction upon the mind of an experienced and able man, one who was well acquainted with the history, the laws, and the constitution of both Great Britain and the colonies? but in that case, decency would have confined him to argument, instead of sneer and ridicule, and to a carriage suited to an equal,
instead of that supercilious superiority assumed over the booby nephew; and this would have deprived his letter of its principal force and spirit. "But let that pass," and let us proceed to what is more to the purpose.
   Our author proves, very satisfactorily, that the cause of contention between us and the colonies, is no recent affair  --  not the factious contrivance of a Lord C m, or a Lord C n, as the historians of the day would have it, but existed in no small force so early in the last century as 1670, (p. 145) and in 1696, (p. 146) gave occasion to a very remarkable act, for the very purpose chiefly of asserting the sovereignty of parliament. Acts of parliament do not take place on such occasions until the mischief to be remedied is already at some degree of ripeness; and accordingly it appears, that the colonies had, for a considerable time, previous to 1696, shewn a disposition to doubt, to dispute, and in some fort to oppose the authority of the English parliament. Their eyes
began to be open, and nature made them feel the inherent rights as men, long before they could define them. On the other hand, false definitions of law and right, have as long suppressed the feelings of equity in the minds of those possessed of the power. Let us make true definitions, and consult our true feelings, and we shall then no longer doubt of the right of independence in the Americans; I say true feelings, because, without we are circumspect, we are continually acquiring false ones, as well as false opinions; and the latter have a wonderful power in generating the former. Witness the daily and perpetual severities we fee practised towards children, to the injury both of body and mind, by injudicious parents, who yet want neither humanity nor tenderness, and who act upon principle. A false system begetting false feelings, while they are injuring and punishing their children, they think they are serving them
and consulting their true happiness; and they consequently feel self-approbation for a conduct that ought to inspire horror and self-reproof. Now, with regard to our American children and kindred, let us divest ourselves of every interest, of every passion, of every prejudice; let us pluck from our hearts that deep-rooted love of rule, and for a moment put ourselves in their places; and then, deliberately and solemnly laying our hand upon our heart, remembering that we are christians, and answerable at the aweful tribunal of the Deity for our very thoughts; let us ask ourselves these plain questions: is
not the end of government to the Americans the same as to all other people, that is to say, the welfare and happiness of the society? Can there be welfare and happiness without freedom? Can freedom exist under a taxation, at
the discretion of the legislature of another, and that a distant, a luxurious, a necessitous country? Is it agreeable to common-sense to imagine, that an American representation in the British parliament could answer the true
ends of representation to the people of that country? or, is it possible, according to any plan which human wisdom hath yet conceived, that the parliament of Great Britain should govern the many and multiplying nations
of America on the true principles of freedom, or without a certainty of sinking herself under the weight of empires. And is it fit that, on the authority of a few logical distinctions, (admitting they were just, which, by the way, they are not) and for the sake of proudly maintaining an absolute, a deceased claim to an empty sovereignty, (for so it is confessed to be, by its advocate the Dean) that we should forget all these considerations, all the ties of consanguinity and affection, all the feelings of humanity, and the divine lessons of our holy religion, and enforce the obedience of the Americans to an odious tyranny by fire and sword?
   It is a matter of the greatest astonishment to me, that a writer so learned, and so clear-sighted as the Dean, should have so far over-looked all arguments of this nature, as to have left himself without a just, a moral reason, as well as a political one, for his proposed separation. As to the matter of fact, concerning the possibility of keeping the sovereignty in our hands, he and I are well agreed, as I have already shewn in my quotation from p. 153, nay, we both agree, that we have it not to keep, that it is already gone, never to be recovered but by conquests never more to be held but with greater armies, and at a greater expence, than ever this country supported in any war. I have also, in a former letter, quoted, what he says in the fame page, (153) in order to shew, that it hath ever been the nature of all colonies, in all ages, to aspire after independence, and made my reflections thereupon, so that we may now hasten to the consideration of his five proposals, and to the conclusion of
the task we have assigned ourselves. If I have trespassed upon the reader, by a repetition of the same arguments in different places, I would observe, that the few plain and clear arguments, on which this question depends, need to be repeated again and again, and never to be lost sight of; for the enemies of liberty, like the disingenuous foes of religion, are a sort of people, who, conscious that they cannot convince, and determined to wrangle, do not scruple to advance the same stale arguments that have been a thousand and a thousand times refuted before; and if not refuted again, as often as they have the shamelessness to revive them, they insult their adversaries with affected shouts of victory and triumph.
   But my manner of treating the subject may, nevertheless, need many apologies. I shall, however, only plead, that these letters have been written as leisure would permit, and sent away to the printer, without reserved copies to refer to: besides which, it may be proper to add, that at the time I am writing this eighth, no more than the two first have made their appearance in the paper. As for the presumption of entering on a subject, without abilities equal to the attempt, I shall only offer, in my defence, that I have been prompted to it through a warm, a passionate love of liberty, and a sincere desire of promoting its cause. Whatever may be my success, I shall never want the pleasing reflection of having done my duty conscientiously, as a member of society, although in a subordinate degree to greater workmen: and, I hope,
it is not uncharitable to think, that if every writer would resign his pen to the fame guidance, we should all be agreed very soon, as nearly as would be requisite, and that mankind would then reap such benefits from political disquisitions, as I fear are not likely to take place, while controversy is carried upon other principles.

LETTER IX
Aprils 9, 1774
WE come now to the consideration of our authors
final sentiments.
I shall not need myself to accompany the Dean throughout this examination, in order to point out the fatal policy of attempting, and total impracticability of
executing, any one of the four first of these schemes, since he has done it so effectually himself as to need no assistance. But though I agree with him in the result, that they are all both impolitic and impracticable, yet I differ widely from him in several arguments introduced in the discussion, and no less in the fundamental principles he frequently argues from. When he talks of the mother country governing, "in the manner she ought to do;" (p. 160) and according to the original terms of the constitution, I presume we are to understand the constitution to be some one individual contract between the mother country and her race of colonies, some certain deed signed and sealed between them and her in due form. Is this the same constitution he told us of in p. 94, of which Magna Charta was the basis? But if terms or conditions be the marks of our constitution, it may indeed be a colony charter, a marriage act, a stamp act, or, in short, any act of Parliament, or of the crown either, so that it will be a matter of very little consequence, whether it have Magna
Charta for its basis, or any basis at all, besides that of the statute in being. Since he lays so much stress on those original terms, by which the colonies are bound to suffer their respectable mother to govern as he thinks "she ought
to do", let us warn him not to rely too much upon analogical reasoning, since it is apt to prove too much. If he means that Great Britain ought to be obeyed by her colonies, because she is their mother, because (he produced them, and gave them their law, and that her contracts with them, when in their infancy, ought to bind them for ever, he would do well to remember, that no civil contract, between a parent and an infant child, affecting the future property of that child, can possibly have any validity, because of the child's being, at the time, in the power of the parent; because it dares not object to it, it cannot reject any terms she may please to dictate. I need not tell our author, that in the eye of the law, and agreeable to the spirit of the constitution, such a contract is esteemed no better than a fraud, or an act of the grossest tyranny.
   Before I take my final leave of the four first of our author's proposals, I must make two observations upon what appears on the face of them. In the first place, let me request the reader to mark attentively the obvious sentiment, the unambiguous language of the second proposal. When the Dean is off his guard, and when the mistaken principles he adopted, respecting the sovereignty of parliament over America, are fora moment out of sight, see
how naturally, how unavoidably he allows all I contend for!  --  Here he admits, by direct and unavoidable implication, that parliament hath not the rights of sovereignty over America; he admits, that America is not a part of the British empire, or he could not possibly propose. In the next place, I want to know, when, under the idea of an union, he has proposed to consent, that the seat of
empire be transferred from Great Britain to America, why  "every home-born Englishman should consider it as such an indignity."  --  The answer is plain, because he would become a slave; and while America shall be governed at Westminster, the Americans will be slaves. If our dignity consist in governing other nations against their wills, it is a dignity we ought to be ashamed of;
but if it be the genuine offspring, and the associate of our liberty and independence, in God's name let our American kindred enjoy it as well as ourselves.
    We now come to the consideration of the Dean's fifth and last proposal of an amicable and friendly separation, concerning which he very justly demands. This proposal, and the invincible arguments in its support, make ample amends for all the errors in the foregoing parts of his work. He shews himself to be master of this part of his subject; and it cannot be too much recommended to those whom I address in these letters, and to the people in general, to make themselves-well acquainted with what he advances. His much superior knowledge of our American commerce, places the good policy of a separation from America in a much stronger point of light than it was in my power to have done: but I flatter myself, I have sufficiently proved, that we could not have kept that country in subjection without being tyrants. When justice and policy both point the same way, nothing but determined wickedness, or a willful blindness can occasion us to take a wrong course.
With the favour of the reader, I must here repeat one of the first observations I made on the Dean's work, as it strikes me afresh with redoubled force every time I consider it, and that is, that the proposed declaration of the
independence of America, is a conclusion in direct opposition to his original premises. In his abstract reasonings on government, and the relation of colonies to the parent state, he falls  --  the common fate of genius on slippery abstract ground, into an error in fundamentals, laying it down as a principle, that "parliament hath the rights of sovereignty over America;" and consequently, that "America is actually a part of the British empire." These are the principles he sets out upon; but behold the result of all his subtle, all his laboured reasonings!  --  At the end of a second work upon the subject, and after exhausting the chaotic treasuries of sophistry for arguments in support of these principles, he concludes with a proposal to the legislature, to declare that parliament, I doth not claim these rights. Nay, but a minute before,
and, as I have observed, when off his guard, he acknowledges that parliament hath not these rights, and even proposes "to attempt to persuade the colonies to agree to an union." There is something too irreconcileable in the idea, as before remarked, of giving up one's rights, in order to promote one's interest; but false principles will ever produce fallacious reasonings. How can we
possibly fay more for an amicable separation front America, than that the absolute necessity of it took, as it were by storm, a mind naturally strong and vigorous, and fortified with all the powers of art against the attack! The Dean, in journeying to the great the imperial city of truth, whose eternal foundations occupy a rock that overlooks the country around, unfortunately sets off in
a mist of prejudice. Sometimes he takes a direct contrary course; sometimes intervals of a clearer light keep him steady in the right road; but then again, as the density of the mist either totally obstructs his view, or discovers truth in faint glimmerings, he frequently deviates into bye paths and hollow ways, to the danger of being lost, even when near his journey's end. At last, however, the fun of conviction bursts forth in meridian blaze, the mist is gone, and he arrives at the eternal city. But after having thus proposed a separation and, after having given reasons for it, in opposition to which, I must needs think no man can remain an infidel, who is not at the same time an idiot; our author is, in my opinion, far more faithless, far more hopeless, than at this time there seems cause to be with regard to the execution of his plan. His plan I call it,
since he is, for aught I know to the contrary, the first who hath taken the pains to propose it publicly, and to explain its advantages, although it has been for some time past a common sentiment amongst discerning and liberal-minded men, and to propose it was the first motive to the writing, and the main drift of these letters. It has been more particularly a common sentiment (for indeed
invention itself cannot hit on any other plausible expedient) ever since the late noble and indignant conduct of the Americans in defence of their almost undermined liberty, as this affords a sufficient demonstration to all intelligent minds, in which the love of liberty and justice retained their influence, that the time is come, that they axe determined to be independent of Great Britain, whether it be with her consent or not; whereas I, on my part, firmly believe, that Lord North is the minister who dares to do this great good to his country. He took the helm in a storm, when no other minister was to be found who could guide it; and he has given us, throughout his administration, very ample proofs of his intrepidity. Are we not, at this moment, under a general consternation at what may be the consequences of his intrepidity I shall he dare, in a single act that has no precedent, to shock this whole nation? Shall he dare to hurl a rash and misguided vengeance on the town of Boston, and bid
a bold defiance to all America, and yet want courage to adopt a measure of the greatest wisdom and goodness; a measure which, to execute, he may esteem the glory of his life? The idea is too contradictory for a character so consistent as his. There are conjunctures in the affairs of kingdoms, when none but an intrepid statesman can stem a head-long torrent of popular zeal, or avert a gathering storm which threatens his authority. If the urgent necessity of the cafe shall not admit of temperate measures, but shall demand a daring act of temporary violence, such a statesman, if he be wise and virtuous also, will avail himself of the short-lived calm that succeeds the conflict, and before the discontents of the people can break forth afresh with redoubled and irresistible impetuosity, he will effectually remove them, by removing their causes, and by giving them a security against future alarms. I hope that the late bill will prove only a temporary violence, and that these moments, which are generally thought to be a sullen calm, foreboding some dreadful political convulsion, maybe pregnant with more salutary measures and plans of peace. The remembrance of it will, in a moment, be done away, when Great Britain shall once have done justice to the Americans, by an open declaration of their independence, and by offering them her friendship. Our mutual jealousies
Will be buried in oblivion, and, as the Dean foretels, the Americans will then consider us as  "their protectors, mediators, benefactors."
