I would not have the reader imagine, I mean to justify every tarring and feathering rioter at Boston, and all disorderly proceedings in America indiscriminately. Some of the people, I doubt not, may have been to blame; for the commonalty of that country must have had a portion of wisdom and patience, which hath not at any time before been found in the world, had
all their expressions of resentment for ill usage, been confined within the bounds of moderation. When governors become tyrants, shall we wonder, that an injured and insulted people become riotous and unruly! Have ambitious and encroaching rulers ever yet thought of rendering satisfaction, of making reparation, for the cruellest injuries they have so constantly committed; and
have they not always thought themselves wonderfully gracious and condescending, when they have merely ceased to oppress but is a free people, finding their humble petitions, and most dutiful remonstrances scattered to the winds with contempt, being stung with a sense of accumulated wrongs, and feeling an I indignation at being treated like slaves and villains, do but assault the meanest miscreant in the train of power; 'tis rebellions! felony! treason! - Gaols and gibbets, ball and bayonet, must here be the correctives. Is this human polity! Are these the proceedings of men, of fellow-creatures, of fellow-christians? When merely ceasing to oppress, is all the reparation
required for a long train of injuries and insults; mail authority, with whom wisdom ought ever to reside, become deaf to that voice which called her into being, and think it meritorious to persist in doing wrong? So universally have I heard the Bostonians condemned for destroying the tea, and the action pronounced illegal and rebellious, that I have taken some pains to examine all the particulars of that affair. Now, to my agreeable disappointment, and to the best of my judgment, instead of an act of rebellion, I find it one reflecting honour, and stamping the character of  good subjects, on those who performed it; instead of being illegal, it appears to me to be warranted by the law of nature,  the great original of all human laws, when just. Those who
would wish to think justly, and to speak honestly of this matter, will do well to examine for themselves. When they shall have so done, with care and candour, and admitting on my part, for the sake of taking no advantage in the argument, the Bostonian character to be as black as malignantly represented, I
should be glad to propose to them this plain question: What was possible for the most wise and virtuous persons on earth, in the place of the Bostonians, to have done, in order to have performed their duty to the utmost, towards God and their country? To have shewn a passive obedience to an unjust act of parliament, in a case of such moment, and of so critical a nature, would have been treason to their country, and therefore not acceptable, I imagine, to God. I have introduced in various conversations, with sensible men, the same
question I here propose, but never yet, I can aver with the strictest veracity, have I met with a solution of it, which did , not confirm me in an opinion, that as wise and virtuous men, as good citizens, and true patriots, they could not possibly have acted otherwise than as they did. They had only this one alternative; they were driven to this dilemma by their magistrates, either to suffer an insidious attempt against their sacred rights and liberties to take effect, or to destroy the hated instrument. Having had no other choice, they must necessarily have either done this, or suffered that which ought to have been chosen by every brave and honest man, I leave the reader to determine. 'Tis visionary, even to childishness, to say, they might have permitted the tea to have been landed, and yet have defeated the tax, by unanimously refusing to have purchased it. The conductors of that noble action must have been patriots indeed, and most wonderfully wise, to have left their country, by going this way to work, at the discretion and mercy of the most ignorant and vicious of its inhabitants, to have relied upon the prudence and self-denial of every tea-drinker in America! Besides that the wisdom of each well-meaning individual was not to be depended on for foreseeing all the ill consequences of purchasing a pound of tea, nor their resolution in preventing them; I fear there might have been some traitors to the public cause, some tools of government or the India Company, or some suspected persons at least, in whom to have confided, for not setting the example, and using all their cunning to seduce others, would not have argued any extraordinary degree of prudence. What teacher of morals or politics, ever was lunatic enough to
build all his hopes of serving his country, on an expectation of bringing every individual of it to be of one mind, and as unanimously to act up to the same rigid principle of virtue? And which of us would care to risk the safety of the city of London from some dreadful calamity, on a confidence that every female, from the fine lady to the washerwoman, every man, from the minister of state down to the blackguard, might be prevailed upon totally to abstain from the use of tea, porter, or gin, except the temptation was removed out of their way.
   To all my readers, except those unhappy ones, who have learned the fatal art of occasionally closing the mental eye, so as to admit just so much, and no more of the light of truth as their passions and prejudices will bear; I must needs think, it would be reflecting upon their understandings and their ingenuousness, to attempt any farther proof of my proposition, that  the Bostonians did what was strictly consonant to right and justice in destroying the tea ; but, in order to open the self-closed, winking eyes of the prejudiced, I will propose one more comparison, which, I apprehend, will be admitted as a fair one, since it is agreed on all hands, except by the calm advancers of
direct falsehoods and lies, and the bold denyers of demonstration, that with regard to taxation, the colonists, as legitimate shoots from a parent stock of freedom, have at least an equal right to be their own tax-masters as the people of Ireland, which was a conquered, and every one knows, a very rebellious kingdom for many ages. Let then the reader only substitute Ireland and Dublin, for Massachuset's Bay and Borkin, and try the cause over again in his own mind. If he pleases, he will suppose, that instead of a duty on tea, we would attempt to touch the pockets of the Irish, by a duty on certain stamped
papers, being publications of gross immoralities and blasphemies, tending to debauch the minds of the people, and fit them for slavery; and that an association of honest citizens of Dublin, more mindful of their duty to God and their country, than of obedience to an ordinance they held to be subversive of
their liberties, should find this precious cargo, precisely in a similar situation with the tea at Boston; that the Lord Mayor, the magistrates, and revenue myrmidons, like the Boston governor and officers of customs, should all absolutely refuse their permission and clearances for its departure from the port, and the ship should be well imprisoned by surrounding batteries; then, what is to be done? what course is to be pursued? Shall those, who ought to be the guides and guardians of the city, admit these pernicious compositions within their walls; patiently behold them displayed in the shops, hawked about the streets, and dispersed throughout the country with every art of invitation to those inclined to purchase? Is the city to be deluged with these impieties, and its manners, morals, and liberties undermined, rather than an united company of merchants trading in mischief should lose their property? a property not only detrimental in itself, but in this case made a venture, with
the direct intention of betraying a brave and generous nation into obedience to a despotic ordinance, containing in it the seeds of a more complete tyranny, and used as the most tempting bait to lure the silly multitude into the political mousetrap; and therefore, on the principles of self-preservation, and
agreeable to the spirit of the law of nature and nations, subject to be destroyed, if not removed upon fair warning. Are the city guardians, I say, to observe all this, and content themselves all the while with a patriotic resolve, not to buy or to read a single paper, and with preaching to the unlistening
people to follow their example? If this, in the enlightened and virtuous city of Dublin, would be an experiment, that even a driveller would hardly dream of making; how much less safe would it have been for the American patriots to have hazarded their all, on the universal good sense, on the piety and public spirit of the people, in the stupid, the hypocritical the impious, the ungrateful, and rebellious town of Boston! What then, I once more ask, ought the patriots of Dublin or qf Boston to have done? What! but with indignation to have cast the hated instrument of tyranny into the sea! whither its proprietors deserved also to have followed it headlong. Is it for this wise, brave, and generous action, that not only the actors of it, but the whole people of Boston, are now smarting under the heaviest vengeance of Great Britain! of a people who have hitherto justly prided themselves in being the undaunted resisters of tyrants! Fie, boasters, fie! Britannia blushes for your degeneracy; she disowns ye for her sons. When a pawnbroker knowingly puts arms into the hands of a
highwayman or ruffian, does any law insure to him payment for the same, at the hands of any one who, being assaulted, seized and destroyed them? Are not all deadly weapons, all snares, traps, and poisons, made use of in violation to the laws of civil society, for injuring any man in life, limb, or property, a lawful spoil to the injured party? When the miscreant, pick-pocket Jew, in the service of iniquity, was once driving a trade amongst the Westminster school-boys, with a parcel of TEA, out of the green cannister of the celebrated Mrs.
Phillips, who, that had a spark of virtuous indignation, but applauded the illegal proceedings of the spirited master, when, disregarding the laws of property, he threw into the fire all of this tea he could lay his hands on ; and, as little considering the penalties for an assault, horsed the vile factor, and scourged him to the quick?
   I must therefore repeat, that the destroyers of the tea at Boston were, in my opinion, a band of virtuous patriots, whose names, when once made public, will doubtless be held in eternal veneration by their countrymen; and that the glorious illegality (if every statute, whether just or unjust, be properly comprehended in the word law) they achieved, was an act of absolute moral and political necessity, and therefore exempt from even good laws; of singular wisdom, of strict justice, and remarkable temper and forbearance, considering their provocations, since it was done in self-defence, with the greatest good
Order and decency, and unaccompanied with incivility to any one, or the smallest damage to any thing in the ships besides the treacherous tea. I must likewise repeat, that this tea, for the reasons I have given, and agreeable to the spirit of the law of nature and nations, was justly forfeited to the injured Americans; and that the East India Company are not entitled to any satisfaction or payment for the same. 

LETTER X and Last
April 14, 1774
NOTHING now remains to be spoken of but the act of parliament necessary to that separation, proposed by the reverend author of the tracts, and seconded in these letters; and that general treaty between Great Britain and the states of America, which will be the necessary, and doubtless the immediate consequence of it. When parliament shall have duly weighed this great, this
important matter,  --  the greatest by far that ever came before any national council whatever ! -- with the attention it merits, and in the temper recommended in my first letter, we may hope to see a nemine contradkente act, whose preamble shall run in some such form as the following. 
   Although, by those unhappy persons, who have no just ideas of right and wrong, and who have not intellects for perceiving, that the original power of Great Britain over her colonies, is on the point of expiring beyond all help and remedy, parliament may be supposed to be a loser by the proposed separation; yet all must confess, that his Majesty will be a gainer, inasmuch as he will thereby receive fifteen independent kingdoms in exchange for as many dependent, and hardly dependent provinces, and become the father of three millions of free and happy subjects, instead of reigning joint tyrant over so many discontented slaves, or losing by revolt so many of his people. What a divine glow of satisfaction must expand the royal bosom on an event so full of bliss, so consonant to humanity and to virtue!  --  an event more full of real lustre  --  more aggrandizing by many degrees than ever before
was experienced by any earthly monarch.  --  How poor, how contemptible, how hateful the triumphs of butchering conquerors compared to this solid glory! May such a transcendant glory be the glory of George the Third!
   We must not be surprized if shallow and designing men, some with real, some with affected ignorance, should cry out, "What! enter into treaty with fifteen independent states, and expect them unanimously to join with you in one general league for mutual advantage and security! How chimerical and visionary the project!" And I do not doubt, but that the swarm of hireling and
prostitute scribblers, whose food is confusion, and whose very existence, like the vermin in an ulcer, is supported by the diseases of the state, will pour forth all their malignity, in order to discredit, and to damn, if possible, a plan so wise and salutary. But their baneful influence will not, I trust, extend itself farther than to disturb, for a short time, the confused minds of our coffee-house politicians. It will still be obvious to all sensible men, especially to those who compose the national council, that when Great Britain shall have done the noblest act of injustice towards the Americans, that the annals of mankind can produce, they will as one man, fly to her for protection, court her friendship, submit themselves to her advice, and be ready to put into her hands a chart 
blanche; and so long as she continues to act upon the same principles, she may undoubtedly influence each separate state, and dictate the terms of general accommodation, without any fear of even future dissatisfactions. To deny 
these conclusions, would be to deny that effects follow their causes. The author of the tracts has already proved, that it is not our power, but the superior advantage of our trade, which secures to us the commerce of the Americans, or that can secure it to us. We shall still have the same power to awe America into a faithful observance of her treaties that we now have, to enforce a disputed and odious sovereignty, and with this manifest advantage, that treating with each state separately, we shall only have one at a time to contend with; whereas we have experienced, by our stamp and tea projects, that while we pretend to govern the whole, the whole will unite to resist us. That bond of union once dissolved, and the natural and necessary jealousy of each other taking place, Great Britain, as the common umpire, will become in effect the general sovereign, so long as she interposes her good offices for maintaining the common independence; and this her own interest will always dictate. Great Britain will of course take care, in the first place, to recover all her debts in America, which, instead of bad debts, as they are now too justly esteemed to be, will, in the transports of their gratitude for a declared and guaranteed independence, be punctually paid, tho' with their last shilling.
Not to mention that fear of offending, (for Great Britain will then become truly formidable to each separate state) would effectually produce this effect, we shall, by the league secure on the most lasting foundation, every advantage of trade with America we now enjoy, and by the separation relieve ourselves from many heavy expences it now costs us; for a proof of which, I again refer to the
Dean's work: we may then disband so much our expensive and unconstitutional standing army, as we now keep upon account of America; and instead of being execrated, as we now are, for that fleet which blocks up
their ports, and is commissioned to humble Boston to the dust, and through her sides, to gall every province on the continent, they will readily consent to its presence for seeing to the exact fulfilling of their treaties, and they
will then look upon it with a friendly, an affectionate and respectful eye, while they consider it as their sure protector against invasion, their refuge in distress, and the avenger of their wrongs.  --  Not being able to pay Great
Britain in subsidies of ready money for her protection and friendship, they will grant her an equivalent in exclusive trade; and they will enter into some general stipulation for the mode and the measure of payment for any such extraordinary assistance of strips as they may at any time solicit, or we, penetrating the designs of our common enemies, may send to their assistance. As for troops, a country containing millions of inhabitants never can
want any: let them rely upon the natural, the best resource  --  a national militia; but, for heaven's sake! never more let the face of a British soldier be seen in North America. A Flanders or a Germany, on the other side of the globe, would be a grave wide enough to swallow the whole strength and treasure of this kingdom. The Americans are in no condition to set themselves up as a maritime power, or to support a navy fit to guard their own coasts, but must rely upon Great Britain for their safety by sea, as indeed it will ever be their interest so to do, knowing by experience, that with regard to them, she is not a conquering, but a commercial state; and having reason to conclude, that a confederacy of their maritime states would probably terminate, like that of Greece, in wars upon one another, and be perverted to answer the ends of ambition to some one, instead of protection to all. After what has been said, I need not point out (but for the sake of my timid and uninformed-reader) that it will be totally unnecessary, and unbecoming the dignity of parliament, to hesitate a moment in passing the act of declaration, for fear the Americans should not afterwards consent to the league. 'Tis absurd to imagine they will
act in contradiction to the principles of self-interest and self-preservation, merely because they shall be free from control; nor is it more possible to conceive, how they should object to a treaty with Great Britain, merely because she had just done them an act of magnanimity and generosity unparallelled in history, and given them an undeniable proof, that she was intitled to their unbounded Confidence, particularly in its not being possible she should have any design upon their liberties. Besides Great Britain, until she have resigned her assumed sovereignty as the mother country, cannot, on the principles of equity, as before illustrated, give any validity to a contract with her children, while held in subjection to her authority. No! the generous spirit that shall set them free, will disdain the meanness of a proceeding so little and so distrustful; and that wisdom which could form so comprehensive a plan, will despise the crookedness and folly of such a narrow policy. 
   Thus have I given a faint sketch of the many and great benefits of an American league  --  the reader's imagination and judgment will finish the picture. If then he can think, that they do not infinitely preponderate against
the advantages to be hoped for from persisting to assert our odious sovereignty, and plundering the colonies by arbitrary tax-gatherers, I have only to say, that he and I can scarcely be made of the fame common materials of humanity; but I shall begin to listen to those profound sages, whose acute penetration, assisted by a certain microscopic species of philosophy, hath discovered, that the Mosaic revelation is a fable, and that, instead of one,
there are indeed many different races of men. On the one hand, the most we can expect is a forced and reluctant submission, with some advantages in trade; but these even for a very, very short period. Mean while, discontent and detestation, brooding in the bosoms of the colonists, will naturally generate a rancorous hate and abhorrence; which, aided by our restless enemies the
French, will shortly terminate in defiance and revenge. On the other hand  --  but repetition is needless. In short, the multiplying millions of America, must either be our foes, or our steadfast friends.  --  Great Britain, take thy choice! 
   What remains, but that we renew our appeal to the manly sense and magnanimity of the great council of this kingdom; a kingdom, great and happy above all the kingdoms of the earth; a council the most august in the whole world, as nursed in the bosom of freedom, and trained in the true principles of just government and pure religion, of which they are the guardians! If men, thus favoured of heaven, thus enlightened, thus elevated, shall not set examples of sterling virtue, where, alas! shall we find it? Consult then your own hearts, ye legislators of Great Britain! Be true to your own feelings, and let the moral sense prevail. If ye are conscious of a love of power, know that 'tis the genuine offspring of the love of liberty. This the root, that the branch. If
your hearts be held in-the curling branch's close embrace, think how, in the hearts of all men, the tenacious root strikes to the bottom, and twines it's clasping fibres around the very springs of life, never to lose their hold! Remember that ye are now to decide on the fate of nations  --  --  perhaps your own. Remember the great legislator beholds your doings. Be your doings like unto his doings. Be tender to humanity; be firm to freedom; be inflexible to justice. Emancipate in one god-like act, a long roll of nations, whose names it is tedious to recount. In one act, lift up the well-pleasing name of Great Britain to heaven, and spread her matchless fame to the ends of the wondering earth. The depth of her wisdom, the transcendency of her virtue, shall be unexampled, and this act remain a monument of her great felicity, an ever-
lasting model of justice, and a theme of praise to all nations, and to all ages. Potentates have, unto dethroned princes, restored their ravished dominions; renowned monarchs, fated with ambition, and the abuse of authority, have, in the plenitude of their power, abdicated thrones; heroes and patriots have given freedom to their native countries; but for the present legislators of Great
Britain was reserved the superior, the supreme glory of bestowing in a foreign soil, liberty on millions! 

