L ET TER VI
March 27, 1774
WHEN we talk of asserting our sovereignty over the Americans, do we foresee to what fatal lengths it will carry us? Are not those nations increasing with astonishing rapidity? Must they not, in the nature of things, cover in a few ages that immense continent like a swarm of bees? Do we vainly imagine, that we can then hold the reins of government, and hurl our thunders on the heads of the disobedient? Where are we to stop? or, shall we pretend to circumscribe American populations? To say, "Thus far ye shall go, and no farther?"  --  No!   -- . Swollen indeed must we be with the pride of dominion, and drunk with the fumes, if we can foolishly imagine these things. It is high time that we opened our eyes to the unintentional encroachments we have been making upon the liberties of mankind, and to the necessity of setting bounds to our dominion. Without the American continent, the British empire will be large enough in all
reason. But if government persist in maintaining our sovereignty there, it may possibly occasion our own destruction, but can be productive of no good to us, either present or future. After all that has been done to alarm the Americans for their fights as free men, and calling up their attention to a thorough investigation of them; after the flame of opposition hath been kindled in
every breast, and now animates them as one man, it will be in vain to steer any middle course; to adopt measures for light oppressions, and compelling obedience to laws moderately tyrannical. We must either relinquish at once our claim to sovereignty, or fix on their neck with strong hand the galling yoke of slavery. We must either conquer ourselves or them. Justice, wisdom, humanity, and religion, leave us without a doubt which to prefer; and, should the latter be determined on, woe be to Great Britain! We may, indeed, by means of fleets and armies, maintain a precarious tyranny over the Americans for a while; but the most shallow politicians must foresee what this would end in. It would expose us to the certain attacks of all our European rivals; and, when we found the necessity of courting the assistance of the Americans, we should deservedly find them the bitterest of our enemies. With the nations of Europe we contend for commerce, for glory, and some imaginary objects; with those of America, the contest would be for the dearest rights, the very dignity of humanity. After the struggles of interest and prowess, a tolerable reconciliation may take place, but eternal enmity and hate always succeed those between a free people and their tyrants. From the spirit of freedom, which hath in all ages glowed in the bosoms of true Englishmen, and which hath brought to its present perfection our glorious constitution in defiance
of every attempt to crush it; we ought to know, that until we can extinguish this spirit in the breasts of the Americans, and eradicate from their very nature its first and noblest principles, self-preservation and free-will, that all our efforts to bow them down in subjection to our authority, must finally be ineffectual, and will recoil sooner or later, perhaps with ten-fold retribution upon ourselves. There are some politicians who think, that present expediency is a sufficient justification of any measures; and who, from the ideas of reimbursing ourselves for the charges of the last war, of supplying the present exigencies of the state, and securing our power over the American commerce, make no scruple to bid us draw the accursed sword, and enslave our children and our brethren. But, be it known to them, that though our very existence as a nation, depended on violating the express laws of God, it must not be done. And if their ignorance, which may be implied from the folly of their proposal,
hath not yet made the discovery, let them be told that policy, national as well as individual, must have justice and the laws of God for its basis, or, 'tis the policy of villains, the policy of sots and fools. Can the legislature of Great Britain, I once more ask, govern the Americans on the true principles of freedom? For the reasons I have already given, I believe it to be impossible. As
to their reimbursing us the sums of money spent on their account in the last war, they will do it, if we act wisely and justly, in the only way it is possible they should, and in the only way we expected of them when we underfoot
the war; that is, by a commerce beneficial to this kingdom. And by leaving them to their own independency, the charges of government may be greatly retrenched.
   Thus far had I written, when the political tracts of a reverend Dean fell into my hands. They amply supply all the examples and explanations necessary to illustrate my principles, and shew to a demonstration the absolute necessity, in a political light, of relinquishing our claims to the sovereignty of America; to which the whole tenour of my letters point, and with which they are to conclude. But I am far from subscribing to this gentleman's doctrine as to the rights of sovereignty. If I could acknowledge the truth of that, I should very much doubt of the propriety of his proposed separation of America from Great Britain; for giving up one's right, cannot be thought a good rule for promoting one's interest. But in this cafe, as is very frequent, his common-sense hath been obliged to subdue his learning before he arrived at truth. While metaphysical refinements teach him to think, that Britain hath a right to govern America, the invincible force of truth extorts from him an acknowledgment that she must, if governed by true policy, relinquish it. 'Tis
pity so able a writer had not discovered, that the Americans have a right to choose their own governors, and t thence inforced the necessity of his proposed separation as a religious duty, no less than a measure of national policy. In so doing, he would have been consistent; there would then have been no obscurity; nor would his sentiments of right and expediency have been at variance; but his conclusion would naturally and evidently have
flowed from his premises, supported by that trite, but true and most excellent maxim, that honesty is the best policy. But, perhaps, some may be of opinion, that the propriety of a separation is more strongly enforced, by its appearing to be the only result he could possibly arrive at through the medium of opinions that pointed the direct contrary way. The same opinions have, in all other writers, led them only to consider, by what means the unity of the whole British empire (taking in America) might be best preserved; how the supreme legislative power might be best supported, and enforce obedience to the utmost bounds of this vast dominion. Every project for this purpose (without a single exception) being embarrassed with a fundamental incompatibility, a radical error in supposing a right, where, in truth, there is none, hath been
visionary, oppressive, sanguinary, and totally impracticable; so difficult it is to strive against the stream of nature and truth.
   The Dean, with more good sense, with an extensive insight into the human heart, and the springs of commerce, and with the temper of a philosophic, uninterested looker-on, hath nobly abandoned the full persuasion of his own mind on the point of right; and, while he thirties we are entitled to govern, foresees and demonstrates the fatal consequences of attempting it. He accordingly advises us to separate in good humour, and trusts to our
mutual interests for its producing, in fact, a real and sincere union. What can more fully prove the right of independence in colonies, too far removed to be governed on the principles of freedom by the mother country, than this universal, this uniform, invariable feeling of all mankind, in all ages, than that "it is the nature of them all to aspire after it." Shall we reject the unvarying testimony of nature speaking home to our hearts, and pin our faith upon the fine-spun, cobweb subtleties of our learned casuists and court-lawyers? or shall we, with more safety, rely upon the letter of an old musty charter, penned before this question was so much as thought of? Hath nature left herself so much without a witness to the truth in the human breast, that we must give ourselves wholly up to the direction of such blind guides as these? Fie! fie! If much learning hath not made us mad, it hath at least in this, and many similar
cafes, made us ignorant. It is to be lamented, that such a blaze of truth, as there is in the above observation, did not discover to the writer the fallaciousness of his original position of parliamentary right to govern the colonies; when all the while, it is the express, the sole purport of this work to prove, that parliament, in continuing to assert this right, cannot promote either the welfare of Great Britain or America.

LETTER VII
March 28, 1774
   SINCE my last letter was sent to the printer, I have a second time looked into the publication therein referred to; and finding it likely to make a strong impression on its readers, as well as that there is the most striking inconsistency between its foundation and superstructure, I perceive that I cannot well pass it over without a regular, tho' concise examination of its third and fourth tract. These alone being immediately to the point, I shall confine my observations to them, without taking notice of the rest of the book.
   In the beginning of the third tract, entitled, "A Letter from a Merchant in London to his Nephew in America," I am sorry to observe an appeal to the spirit of our constitution treated with ridicule, and an attempt made to substitute in place of this only genuine authority, the letter of the statutes, or even of Magna Charta itself; for these may all be imperfect, tho', as I have
proved in a former letter, the spirit of the constitution cannot. A proceeding of this kind in an anonymous writer, or one of no credit, would, I confess, have givers me an alarm of danger, and a suspicion of some deep design against the cause of truth: it certainly is very far from being a recommendation of the present work. May we not ask what is meant by removing the appeal from
the spirit of the constitution to something which is called "the constitution itself," (p. 93, 94) and what that something is? It is not defined, nor can I understand what it is, unless it be a something which hath its sole existence in the varying and unsteady letter of the statute law, and therefore may be one thing to-day, and another to-morrow, as it was once tyranny and popery, and is at present freedom and true religion. If the author will be candid, he must acknowledge, that his distinction of "the constitution itself," from the spirit of the constitution, is unlogical, and a palpable contradiction. How can any thing be set in contradistinction to its essence? That "Magna Charts is the great foundation of English liberties, and the basis of the English constitution," I
must positively deny, It is indeed a glorious member of the superstructure, but of itself would never have existed, had not the constitution already had a basis, and a firm one too, And as to this charter feeing the "foundation of English liberty,'' that was evidently otherwise, since it was an exertion of this very liberty that produced the charter; extorting it from an encroaching King, as
a mere formal declaration of rights, already known to be the constitutional inheritance of every Englishman. Besides, I have elsewhere observed, that the original and only real foundations of liberty were, by the Almighty architect, laid together with the foundations of the world, when this right was ingrafted into the nature of man at his creation; and therefore it cannot be held, after the manner of an external property or possession, by charters and titles of human fabrick. We ought to be careful to preserve a gospel purity in our civil as in our religious constitution; for they are both founded on the word of
God. If the religious be more express and clear, the civil is more antient, and no less divine, though only revealed to us by a general and fainter impress on the mind and heart of man. If the Dean will not admit the decrees of popes and councils as of equal authority with the word of God, he will not surely maintain, that a Magna Charta ought to come in competition with the spirit of a constitution, whose basis is internal justice and inherent liberty; a Magna Charta, notoriously known to have been extorted by the sword, and formed and ratified in the heat of a hostile contention. Nor will he, it is to
be hoped, plead "the public statutes of the realm," (p. 145) when they militate against the spirit, or gospel purity of the constitution. And here I must remark, that his quotations of them, in order to prove the sovereignty as parliament, have not the weight of fair evidence in the trial now before the tribunal of the public; since they stand in the place, and in the nature of parties concerned.
It is these very "public statutes of the realm," arrogating a right to govern and to tax the Americans which are called in question; therefore their testimony goes for nothing. If the cause be given in their favour, then it will be time enough for them to operate; but if it goes against them, they must all be condemned as usurpations. We are now arguing what is just and right, and ought to be practised, not what has been practised by those who had the power in their hands; not what they have been pleased, in their declarations, to call just and right. Although parliament should enact, that reason and truth
should no longer be reason and truth, yet plain and honest people would be apt to call them reason and truth still, and to rely upon them with the same assurance they do at present. As to the imagination of Great Britain and America being one empire, these are only words that serve to blind, to amuse, and to confound inconsiderate reasoners. How often must it be repeated, that
pride, ambition, and lust of dominion, are not, on any pretence whatsoever, to be gratified at the expence of nations; and that the sole end of civil government is to promote the good of the people? If an empire become too
wide and unwieldy for this purpose, I do assert, that by the laws of nature, which are the laws of God, it is, no empire, that is to say, not a just empire. It therefore must be divided, unless we admit that tyranny can be rightfully established, which God forbid! 
 I entirely agree with this writer, that the member chosen and returned by certain individuals, is the representative of the whole nation; so that what is generally called a virtual, is, in fact, a real representation; but, at the same time I must say it doth not appear to be very consistent with the spirit of our constitution, (if that expression will not give offence) that a Dunwich or an Old Sarum, containing half a dozen cottagers, should have the chusing of as
many of these national representatives as a Norwich or a Bristol; nor that a Weymoath should return as great a number as the metropolis.
 Is not this an abuse that calls aloud for reformation? Can any thing be more notorious, than that a great majority of the national representatives are elected by a small number of indigent and corrupt men, who professedly make
a trade of voting, and who gratify, in the very act, a sordid self-interest, in direct violation of the rights and interests of the nation collectively. These electors being primarily the representatives of the nation, may be called
the elective representatives; and are answerable to the nation for the exercise of that great trust. If they pervert it from the end for which it was given them, and transfer it to bad men for their own selfish purposes, it is fit they
should be deprived of it, in order to the establishing a more just and safe mode of electing the legislative representatives of the nation. 
...it is full as evident, that no man in his senses can see any just similitude,
with respect to parliamentary jurisdiction and taxation between a metropolis, the very central point of a nation, and an entire kindred nation, which hath arisen in the new world, at the distance of three thousand miles from the
parent state, and beyond the vast Atlantic Ocean. It is consistent with the security of the liberty and property of the citizens of London, to be subject to parliamentary jurisdiction and taxation; but this subjection would not be consistent with the security of the American nations. May not a man in his senses believe, that a kindred nation, or a colony, if you please, may be capable of managing its own concerns; and that it is full as likely to do it faithfully as the legislators of its mother country? May not a man in his senses believe, that such a state hath a right to appoint the guardians of its own liberties and properties, and to defend them against all invaders, even the legislators of its mother country, without involving himself in either "folly or absurdity!" Would the independency of any colony or kindred nation in America, necessarily create any such confusion, any such inconsistency in the
government of Great Britain, as would follow from the independency of, and a separate supreme legislation in the capital city?


